Throughout all of our lifetimes, the
Middle East is a region that has been
nearly synonymous with warfare,
instability, and conflict. You have
heard nearly every single year of your
life about some kind of conflict going
on in this place, regardless of when you
were born, because conflicts have been
raging here without a pause for nearly
the entirety of the past century. Just
since the turn of the 21st century
alone, there have been major wars fought
across the territories of Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, and Yemen
that have variously attracted the
military involvements of Iran, Jordan,
Saudi Arabia, Egypt, the United Arab
Emirates, Turkey, and powers from even
beyond the Middle East, like the United
States, United Kingdom, France, and
Russia. These 21st century conflicts in
the Middle East alone have claimed the
lives of millions of people, and forced
millions more into exile and refugee
status, while costing trillions of
dollars, making the Middle East arguably
the most geopolitically turbulent region
anywhere in the 21st century world. But
why is this part of the world the way
that it is? Why do you always hear about
wars and conflicts taking place here?
And why will you probably continue
hearing about wars and conflicts taking
place here for the rest of your life?
The answers [snorts] to those questions
are complex, because the modern Middle
East is the most geopolitically
complicated chessboard in the world to
really understand. With dozens of
different actors and competing interests
all variously working against each other
at sometimes and then working together
at others. But in order to understand
the root cause of the modern Middle
East's many problems, you only have to
rewind the clock a little more than a
hundred years ago to learn how the
Middle East borders we know today came
into being, and why they have guaranteed
more than a centuries worth of forever
wars and misery for the entire world
ever since. For many centuries, the
Turkish Ottoman Empire dominated
practically the entirety of the Middle
East and enforced its own rule of law
across the land. Dozens of ethnicities,
languages, and religions all composed
the extremely diverse peoples of the
empire that at one point spanned from
Hungary to Yemen. The Ottoman Empire had
regions within it, but it had no
tolerance for nations, and nationalism
within the empire of any kind was always
ruthlessly repressed and crushed in the
name of greater imperial stability and
peace. But the Ottoman Empire eventually
entered into a long period of gradual
decline, and by the 19th century, the
rising British Empire was growing
increasingly interested in the Middle
East that the Ottomans had so thoroughly
dominated for so long. The Middle East,
you see, geographically stood in the way
between the British Home Islands and the
Crown's most important colony, India. In
order to better safeguard British ships
traveling between India and the Home
Islands, the British began gradually
acquiring protectorates across the
Middle East, beginning with the modern
United Arab Emirates in 1820, and then
gradually expanding from there to
include Southern Yemen, Bahrain, and
eventually Egypt itself in 1888. Nearly
20 years after the Suez Canal had first
been completed, which granted the
British the quickest possible journey
time between the Home Islands and India
by way across the Mediterranean and the
Red Sea. The Suez Canal, owned by
British and French shareholders despite
running through Egypt, was therefore one
of Britain's most geopolitically
valuable assets, and they intended to
ensure their continuous access to it by
forcing Egypt into the status of a
protectorate. The British further
established protectorates over Oman and
Kuwait, and then in 1914, alarmed by the
increasing British meddling in the
Middle East and their internal affairs,
the Ottoman Empire took the decision to
join the First World War on the side of
Imperial Germany. It was shortly after
that, when the British and the French
decided that the Ottoman Empire would
have to be completely destroyed by them.
But it was initially unclear what
exactly would take the place of the
centuries-old rule of the Ottomans. In
1916, British and French diplomats named
Mark [music] Sykes and François Georges
Picot negotiated a secret treaty
regarding how their respective
governments would divide and partition
the lands of the Ottoman Empire between
themselves after the war's conclusion
and the ancient empire's destruction.
The agreement became simply known as the
Sykes-Picot Agreement, and basically
went as follows. This zone would fall
under direct colonial British rule. This
zone would in time become an independent
Arab state under British influence. This
zone would fall under direct colonial
French rule. This zone would in time
become another independent Arab state,
but under French influence. This zone
would be given to the Russian Empire,
while the region of Palestine and
Jerusalem, with its immense religious
significance, would be placed under some
kind of as of yet unspecified
international administration. These
initial political lines that the British
and French diplomats drew across the
Middle East for the future of the region
in 1916 paid little attention to the
complex real borders of the Middle
East's various religious beliefs,
languages, and ethnicities. But the
lines were also not just arbitrarily
drawn, either. While not based on
ethnicity, language, or religion, or
really even geography in many cases, the
lines were instead based upon the older
Ottoman internal divisions that they had
created, which also had little to no
regard for ethnic or religious
boundaries in their vast ethnically,
linguistically, and religiously diverse
empire, where nationalism and separatism
was never tolerated. The British zone
initially encompassed the Ottomans'
provinces of Baghdad and Basra and parts
of Deir ez-Zor and Damascus, while the
French zone initially encompassed the
Ottomans' provinces of Mosul, Deir
ez-Zor, Aleppo, Adana, Beirut, and
Lebanon, while the international
Palestine area was based on the province
of Jerusalem itself, that reported
directly to the Ottoman capital. This
was the map that Sykes and Picot drafted
their own new lines atop of in 1916,
rather than any detailed ethnic,
linguistic, or religious map of the
region, resulting in massive
consequences that have reverberated down
the decades ever since. The initial
terms of the 1916 Sykes-Picot Agreement
were then even further complicated by
several other British wartime promises,
and assumptions. In order to encourage
an Arab revolt against their Turkish
overlords, many British officials
guaranteed that they would favor the
creation of a large, unified Arab state
[music] across the Arab lands following
the end of the war. At nearly the same
time though, in 1917, Britain also
proclaimed the Balfour Declaration,
which promised that the British
government would favor the creation of a
national home for the Jewish people in
the land of Palestine. And then finally,
there was the question of oil. Oil had
been first discovered in the Middle East
in a remote part of Iran in 1908, that
the British subsequently dominated
through their state-owned Anglo-Persian
Oil Company, which would later evolve
into the British Petroleum, or BP
company that we know of today. But
Iran's oil at the time wasn't considered
enough. World War I was proving to
everyone involved how critical oil was
becoming as a strategic resource to fuel
the new machines of war, from
battleships to airplanes, and the United
States was at that time by far the
world's largest producer and supplier of
oil. America therefore provided the
British Empire with most of their oil
needs. But America's president of the
time was also Woodrow Wilson, a man who
was staunchly opposed to the concept of
empires in the post-war world, including
Britain's. So, believing America to be a
potentially unreliable provider of oil
to their empire in the future, the
British government was at the time
highly incentivized to acquire influence
and control over as much of the Middle
East nearby to Iran as possible, where
they believed that potential future
massive oil deposits would be later
discovered and owned by them, providing
Britain with the critical oil it would
need to fight through whatever conflict
would come to them next. After World War
I concluded, the victorious allies met
at Versailles in 1919 to set the terms
of the peace, and the borders of the
Middle East were shifted once again. The
Ottoman province of Mosul was
transferred from the French zone of
influence over to the British zone of
influence, and as the Ottoman Empire was
actively collapsing, the allies pressed
the infamous terms of the Treaty of
Sèvres upon the dying empire in 1920.
The terms of which made even the Treaty
of Versailles that was pressed upon
Germany seem fairly generous. The terms
of the previous Sykes-Picot Agreement
between Britain and France would remain
intact. With the Russian Empire now
gone, a huge independent state of
Armenia was to be carved out of
northeastern Anatolia. Another
independent state for the Kurdish people
was to be further carved out of
southeastern Anatolia. Italy was to
seize control over several of the
empire's Aegean islands. Greece was to
annex much of eastern Thrace and a chunk
around the city of İzmir on the
Anatolian mainland, while the area
around the strategically important
Turkish straits was to fall under an
international regime outside of Turkey's
remaining jurisdiction. The Turkish
state that was to be left over was
doomed to become nothing more than an
insignificant rump state. And thus,
outraged by the treaty's terms, the
emerging Turkish government almost
immediately rebelled and continued
fighting against the allies for the next
two years. After the Turkish forces made
significant military gains on the
battlefield, they forced to return back
to the negotiating table again, and
concluded with the terms of the 1923
Treaty of Lausanne, which replaced the
terms of the previous Treaty of Sèvres
and were far more favorable to Turkey.
Finally, the borders of the modern
Middle East as we roughly know them as
today were set in ink. But the terms of
Lausanne in 1923 still left many
questions and problems unresolved. There
would be no independent state created
for the Kurdish people after all, for
example, a problem that has vexed the
region for the century ever since.
Today, the Kurds are one of the largest
stateless people in the world, numbering
some 40 million strong with their own
separate ethnic, cultural, and
linguistic identity, but divided between
the borders of what became Turkey,
Syria, Iraq, and Iran, where in all four
countries they are minority groups and
have often been subject to persecution
and discrimination. Kurdish nationalism
and separatism, and the desire to create
an independent Kurdish state out of
these areas, has been a constant
flashpoint of conflict in this region
ever since. The British also smooshed
together the former Ottoman provinces of
Mosul, Baghdad, and Basra into their
mandate for Mesopotamia, which would
later evolve into the state of Iraq. But
the problem with that was that all three
of those Ottoman provinces contained
very different people with very
different interests, identities, and
beliefs. The people of Mosul were mostly
ethnically Kurdish. The people of the
Baghdad province were primarily Sunni
Muslim Arabs, while the people of the
Basra province were mostly Shia Muslim
Arabs. Even further, what became Kuwait
had also been a formal part of the Basra
province under the Ottoman
administration until the British showed
up and transformed it into a
protectorate of theirs. After World War
I, the British legally separated Kuwait
from the Basra province and from Iraq,
and they kept Kuwait as their own
protectorate until the 1960s,
which in the end would give the Iraqi
state a decent historical claim to
Kuwait that would eventually be acted
upon by Saddam Hussein's invasion in
1990. Iraq became independent from the
British mandate in 1932 and emerged as a
deeply internally fragmented state with
a historical claim on Kuwait. And it was
also almost completely landlocked with
only a tiny sliver of a coastline on the
Persian Gulf wedged in between Kuwait
and Iran. And it further controlled
neither of the headwaters for the two
great rivers that it would rely so
heavily upon for its civilization, the
Tigris and Euphrates, both of which
begin further to the north within
Turkey. The French mandates weren't
created much better either. The Lebanon
province of the Ottoman Empire was
deliberately separated as an independent
state by the French based on that
province's slight religious majority of
Christians at the time. But it had very
significant minorities of Sunni and Shia
Arabs and Druze Arabs as well.
Meanwhile, the polyglot Ottoman
provinces of Aleppo, Beirut, Damascus,
and Deir ez-Zor were all smooshed
together to form what became Syria,
putting large numbers of Sunni Kurds,
Sunni Arabs, Alawite Shia Arabs, and
Christian Assyrians and Arabs all into
the same country. And then in the 1930s,
the Turkish government began pressuring
the French to cede over the Syrian
province of Alexandretta owing to that
province's large Turkish community,
fearing that if they did not yield to
the Turkish demands that Turkey may join
in an alliance with Nazi Germany. The
French relented and pushed out
Alexandretta from the Syrian mandate as
the independent state of Hatay in 1938.
Then the following year in 1939, the
independent Hatay state held a highly
controversial referendum on annexation
into Turkey that was passed, resulting
in it entering Turkey as the Hatay
province. And ever since then, the
government of what would later become
Syria has continually claimed the Hatay
province as rightfully Syrian territory
under Turkish occupation. And even
further, the headwaters for the
Euphrates River that runs all across
Syria begins up in Turkey as well,
meaning that Turkish-built dams on the
Euphrates and the Tigris present direct
challenges to both Syria's and Iraq's
supplies of water, leading to further
sources of potential conflict between
Iraq and Syria on one side and Turkey on
the other. Lebanon became independent
from the French mandate in 1943 and
Syria in 1946. And Syria immediately
emerged with territorial disputes with
Turkey over Hatay and territorial claims
to the whole of Lebanon based on the
French decision to artificially separate
it based on religious demographics,
while being itself a deeply internally
fragmented state along sectarian and
ethnic lines just like Iraq and also
Lebanon. Then all of these political
divisions created by the Allies'
mapmaking between 1916 and 1923 were
even further exacerbated by the future
discoveries of oil and gas across all of
these brand new countries. Oil was only
first discovered in Iraq in 1927, years
after the borders had already been drawn
and settled, marking the first major
discovery of oil in the Arab world.
Future initial discoveries of oil were
made in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia a decade
later in 1938. And then much later in
Syria and the United Arab Emirates in
1956 and 1958 respectively. But the
locations of where the oil and gas
reserves were to be discovered across
all of these new countries in nearly
every single case would ensure
generations of nearly continuous
conflict over them. Within Iraq, oil was
discovered across the former Ottoman
provinces of Basra and Mosul, home to
the Shia Arab and Sunni Kurdish
communities, but hardly any oil at all
would be discovered in the central
Baghdad province that was primarily home
to the Sunni Arabs. Even further, an
overwhelming 90% of all of Iran's oil
reserves would simply be discovered
within the Iranian province of
Khuzestan, which encompasses an exposed
flat plain on the western side of the
Zagros Mountains that otherwise largely
forms the rest of Iran's westernmost
borders. [music] And even further,
Khuzestan was primarily inhabited by
Shia Arabs rather than the Shia Persians
who made up the majority of the rest of
the country. Kuwait, though small in
size, also had enormous oil reserves
nearly equal to the entirety of Iraq's
oil reserves. And of course, Iraq
contained the historical claim to
Kuwait, a card that could be
theoretically deployed at any time to
double the Iraqi state's oil resources.
In Saudi Arabia, home to the largest
share of the Persian Gulf's oil, the oil
would be almost entirely discovered in
just a small area of the eastern side of
the country near to the waters of the
Gulf itself within lands that were home
to Saudi Arabia's Shia Muslim minority,
while hardly any at all would be
discovered in the Sunni majority areas.
And then in Syria, the oil was found
almost entirely in the east and the
northeast of the country in the lands of
the Sunni Kurds and the Sunni Arabs,
while hardly any at all was discovered
in the Alawite Shia Arab lands of the
west. All in all, the oil found across
the Middle East scattered across the
complicated mosaic of competing ethnic,
religious, and political identities
would prove to make up nearly half of
the entire world's known supply of oil,
meaning that outside powers like the
British, the Soviets, and eventually the
Americans were all going to be
permanently interested in influencing
the region's events atop all of the
dozens of local ethnic, religious, and
political interests and actors seeking
to influence events as well. And then
the British did something else in the
Middle East as well. They created a
Jewish state out of their other mandate
on the other side of the Middle East in
Palestine. In the wake of the Holocaust
perpetrated by Nazi Germany in Europe,
hundreds of thousands of Jewish refugees
had been fleeing for their lives to the
British mandate for Palestine,
encouraged by the British government's
own promises for a Jewish homeland made
in the Balfour Declaration of 1917. And
in the process, changing the mandate's
demographics, which had previously been
almost entirely populated by Arabs. As
Britain prepared to release the mandate
for Palestine as an independent state
following the end of World War II, the
newly created United Nations released a
plan for the partition of mandatory
Palestine in 1947 between a newly
created Jewish state and a Palestinian
Arab state and an international
administration placed in control over
the holy city of Jerusalem. The plan was
accepted by most of the Jewish groups,
but nearly universally rejected by most
of the Arab groups on the basis that the
proposal was too unfair and tilted too
much towards the Jewish side. Despite
the Palestinian Arab population at the
time in mandatory Palestine being more
than twice as many as the Jewish
population was, the 1947 UN partition
plan called for giving the Jewish state
62%
of the mandate's land, while only 38% of
the land would be allocated to the Arab
state. Fighting between the Arabs and
the Jews in mandatory Palestine
escalated and as the British withdrew in
1948, the state of Israel declared its
independence, thus starting the
continuous Arab-Israeli conflict that
has remained ever since. Not one Arab
country in the world would recognize
Israel's existence as legitimate at
first, and a coalition of mostly
recently created or independent Arab
states went to war with Israel in 1948
in support of the Palestinian Arab
cause. Israel ended up emerging
victorious in that war and ended up in
control over all the lands that the UN
had assigned to the Jewish state in the
1947 partition plan in addition to 60%
of the UN-proposed Arab state's land and
the western half of Jerusalem, while
Jordan occupied and then annexed the
Palestinian-assigned West Bank and
international East Jerusalem, while
Egypt occupied the Palestinian-assigned
Gaza Strip and transformed it into a
protectorate. No independent Palestinian
Arab state would end up emerging and an
estimated 700,000 Palestinian Arabs were
exiled or became refugees displaced from
their homes, with many of them fleeing
into neighboring Lebanon in an event
that they referred to as the Nakba or
the catastrophe, which would gradually
alter that country's demographics to
being more Muslim-dominated, leading to
future internal demographic conflict in
that country like the long Lebanese
Civil War that would last between 1975
and 1990. At the same time, hundreds of
thousands of additional Jews would
migrate towards Israel from the
shattered communities left behind by the
Nazis in Europe, further tilting
Israel's demographics more in favor of
Jews. The defeat of the Arabs against
Israel in 1948 gave way to the rise of
Gamal Abdel Nasser in Egypt, a secular
Arab nationalist who dreamed of unifying
all of the Arab lands in the Middle East
beneath a single Arab superpower state
that would utilize most of the Middle
East's oil as their superweapon, a
superweapon that he hoped would lead to
the defeat of Israel and its primary
backer, the United States. Nasser came
to power in Egypt in 1954, and he would
only be the first of many post-World War
II Middle Eastern leaders who would set
about to change the map of the region
set into place by Sykes-Picot. He railed
against not only Israel and the United
States, but against the Arab monarchies
like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait as well,
whom he saw as corrupted and who were
actively developing closer relations to
the United States over their vast oil
resources. In 1956, Nasser took the
fateful decision of nationalizing the
Suez Canal and destroying the ownership
structure over it that had been
dominated by the foreign British and
French shareholders for nearly a
century. The British, French, and
Israelis all retaliated with war and an
invasion of Egypt to try and regain
colonial control over the canal. But
this time, both the United States and
the Soviet Union alike rebuked the
colonial invaders and Egypt emerged
victorious, catapulting Nasser and his
flavor of secular Arab nationalism to
the status of much of the Arab world's
new champion. In 1958, a coup by
military officers in Syria pledging
personal loyalty to Nasser took over the
country and joined it with Egypt in the
short-lived United Arab Republic, which
only fell apart just 3 years later in
1961 when another group of Syrian
officers launched another coup and
restored Syria again as an independent
nation. Civil war in North Yemen
exploded the following year in 1962 when
the monarchist government there and
Nasserist-style Arab nationalist
Republican rebels leading to the modern
Middle East's first proxy conflict. The
monarchist Middle Eastern states like
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan, and
Imperial Iran all bulked at the prospect
of a revolution in Yemen toppling the
monarchy there and then spreading to
their own monarchies. And so they all
intervened militarily on behalf of the
Yemeni monarchist regime. While Nasser,
wanting to spread the cause of Arab
nationalism and unity, massively
supported the nationalist rebels by
sending tens of thousands of Egyptian
troops and copious volumes of weapons.
The war ended up turning into Egypt's
version of the Vietnam war, consuming
enormous amounts of manpower and
resources and developing into a
stalemate, greatly weakening the
Egyptian armed forces in the process. By
1967, Nasser was again threatening war
with Israel over on another front. But,
encouraged by Egyptian defeats in Yemen,
the Israelis decided to strike first.
Surprise Israeli airstrikes against
Egyptian forces caught them completely
off guard leading to rapid Israeli
military gains against Egypt, Jordan,
and Syria in what would become known as
the Six-Day War. Israel ended the war by
occupying the Golan Heights from Syria,
the West Bank and East Jerusalem from
Jordan, and the Gaza Strip and the Sinai
Peninsula from Egypt, placing Israeli
forces on the entire Eastern bank of the
Suez Canal itself, which caused Egypt to
shut the canal down to all maritime
traffic for the next 8 years. Jewish
Israeli settlers would then begin to
move in and colonize all of the recently
occupied territories, leading to further
conflicts between the Israeli state and
the Arab and Islamic worlds. And then,
crushed and humiliated by the defeat,
Nasser was forced to withdraw from the
war in Yemen and died shortly afterwards
from a heart attack at just 52 years old
in 1970. It was also around that time
that the British Empire decided that
they can no longer financially maintain
their commitments to security in the
Middle East and the Persian [music] Gulf
and critically all of the oil there. In
1971, the British protectorates of
Bahrain, Qatar, and the modern United
Arab Emirates in the Gulf were all
finally granted their independence. And
without the British there any longer,
the United States began taking an
increased interest in the region
instead, wishing to maintain the status
quo and regional stability in the Gulf
in order to safeguard the world supply
of oil. In contrast to the frequent wars
that were being fought over on the other
side of the Middle East, the United
States began encouraging their ally at
the time, Imperial Iran, to step forward
as the new guarantor of the region's
security and to block the expansion of
the Soviets from entering into the Gulf.
Massive amounts of American weapon sales
were made to arm Imperial Iran for this
exact purpose, a policy that would
quickly backfire very badly. But on the
other side of the Middle East, Nasser's
Arab nationalist successor in Egypt,
Anwar Sadat, and the recently risen to
power Arab nationalist in Syria, Hafez
al-Assad, decided to join forces again
and attack Israel in order to reclaim
the occupied Golan Heights and the Sinai
Peninsula. Israel once again emerged
victorious in that war, but fearful that
they would not always be so capable of
winning surrounded by enemies, the 1973
Yom Kippur War paved the way for peace
between Egypt and Israel 6 years later
in 1979 following the Camp David Accords
negotiated by the Carter administration
in the United States, in which Israel
agreed to dismantle all of their
settlements in the Sinai Peninsula and
return it back to Egypt in exchange for
Egypt recognizing the legitimacy of
Israel's statehood, which made Egypt the
first country in the entire Arab world
to ever do so after more than 30 years
of Israel's existence. Peace between
Israel and Egypt had at last been
achieved, but the peace was denounced by
every other Arab state in the world,
including most of all by Syria, which by
that time was under the nearly
totalitarian regime of Hafez al-Assad
and his brand of extremely militant
secular Arab nationalism or Ba'athism.
Egypt was expelled from the Arab League
for decade over the peace agreement.
Sadat himself was assassinated by
Egyptian Islamist militants who believed
that he was a traitor, and Syria began
championing itself as the new primary
backer of the Palestinian Arab cause. As
more and more of Palestinian refugees
fled into neighboring Lebanon, that
country's extremely diverse demographics
began tilting ever more in favor of the
Muslims to the point where the
Christians eventually became less than
half of the overall population. The
Lebanese Christians had generally
dominated the government and they
generally sided with Israel and the
Western world, while the Lebanese Sunni
and Shia Muslims generally sided with
the Arab and Muslim world instead,
eventually culminating in the explosion
of a complex and multi-sided civil war
beginning in 1975
that would last for 15 years until 1990.
Ba'athist Syria would invade Lebanon in
1976 and then spent years attempting to
integrate and annex the country directly
into Syria based on the separation that
the French had done with their
map-making after Sykes-Picot. Israel
would also invade Lebanon in their
attempts to fight against Palestinian
forces there and secure the safety of
their northern border, leading to direct
Israeli and Syrian fighting in the
country as well. The Israeli occupation
in Lebanon would only end in 2000, while
the Syrian occupation only ended in
2005. In retaliation for their worsening
relationship with Syria, Israel
unilaterally declared to annex the
occupied territories of East Jerusalem
in 1980 and the Syrian Golan Heights in
1981, setting it on the path of a
permanent territorial dispute with Syria
that lasts into the present day as each
side ever since has claimed that the
Golan Heights is a core part of their
integral territories. And at nearly the
same time as these events were ongoing,
a revolution exploded in Iran in 1979
that toppled the autocratic US-aligned
monarchy of the Shah and replaced him
with a new revolutionary theocratic
regime dominated by the Iranian Shiite
Muslim clergy and their leader, the
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The new
revolutionary Iran completely changed
the way the Middle East worked because
they emerged as the first truly Islamist
government in the region. The new
Iranian regime's Shia Islamist ideology
believes and continues to believe in the
concept of a grand Islamic civilization
consisting of all the Islamic peoples
and territories all across the world and
that all of these Islamic territories
should be united under the rule of the
Islamic clergy and their supreme leader.
The new revolutionary Iran was also open
about their desire to export and spread
their Islamic revolution first to the
Shia Muslim majority lands across the
Middle East in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon,
Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen, and
then from there to the rest of the
Islamic world. All of the monarchies in
the Islamic world like the Arab
monarchies of Saudi Arabia and the Gulf
states were to be toppled during this
revolutionary process. While Israel, in
the Iranian mind a Western occupier of
rightfully Islamic lands, would have to
be completely destroyed. These foreign
policy goals would ultimately make Iran
a bitter and irreconcilable enemy of
both the Israelis and also the Saudis
and every other Arab monarchy across the
region in [music] addition to the United
States, all of whom wish to contain the
Islamic revolution within Iran and
prevent it from spreading any further.
It also initially made Iran a terrifying
enemy within Iraq, where power had just
recently been seized by the Ba'athist
secular Arab nationalist Saddam Hussein
just as the revolution in Iran was
erupting. Saddam and his ruling clique
of Ba'athists in Iraq came from the
Sunni Arab minority of the country from
the former Ottoman province of Baghdad,
and he deeply feared revolutionary
Iran's exportation of the Shia
revolution into the Basra area of Iraq,
where the majority of the population
were also Shia and where the majority of
Iraq's oil reserves were also located.
Thus, determined to kill the Iranian
revolution in its cradle before it could
spread, Saddam invoked the call of Arab
nationalism when he decided to send the
Iraqi army invading into Iran in 1980
with a stated goal of conquering the
Arab majority province of Khuzestan on
the flat plain west of the Zagros
Mountains and adding its massive oil
resources to his own already large
existing Iraqi oil arsenal, and setting
himself down the path as the next great
aspirant to the mantle of the Arab hero
who would rail against the map of the
Middle East created by Sykes-Picot. But
instead, the Iran-Iraq War would turn
into an 8-year-long apocalypse that
would claim the lives of half a million
people and injure around a million more.
Desperate to keep Iraq afloat as a
buffer state between themselves and the
fiercely anti-monarchist and
expansionist revolutionary Iran who had
just toppled their own monarchy, the
Kuwaitis and the Saudis each lent tens
of billions of dollars to Saddam in
order to keep him in the fight for
longer, the origin of the long-standing
Saudi-Iranian Cold War. But for Saudi
Arabia, the fear went much deeper. You
see, across the 17th and 18th centuries,
Bahrain, an island in the Persian Gulf
right off of the Saudi mainland, had
been ruled by various dynasties coming
from Persia and Iran. The British had
transformed Bahrain into a protectorate
of theirs only in 1861, and after it was
granted independence a century later in
1971, the Imperial State of Iran claimed
the island as rightfully belonging to
them instead. After the 1979 Islamic
Revolution, the new theocratic
revolutionary Iran continued the claim
that Bahrain was a lost Iranian province
and that it should be returned to them,
further amplified by the fact that the
vast majority of Bahraini citizens were
and are Shia Muslims, but ruled by a
Sunni Muslim monarchy friendly to the
fellow Sunni monarchies in Saudi Arabia,
Qatar, Kuwait, and the United Arab
Emirates. Bahrain is these days directly
connected to Saudi Arabia by an
18-mile-long bridge. The island is only
located about 60 km away from Saudi
Arabia's largest single oil field,
Ghawar, only about 50 km away from the
headquarters of Saudi Aramco, the state
oil company, and only about 80 km away
from Ras Tanura, which is the Saudi's
largest oil export terminal. Bahrain is
placed directly off the coast of the
Shia Muslim majority area of Eastern
Saudi Arabia, where nearly the entirety
of Saudi Arabia's oil reserves and
infrastructure are located, meaning that
were the Iranians to successfully export
the revolution into Shia majority
Bahrain and topple the Sunni monarchy
there, the next target would be the
next-door Shia majority areas of Eastern
Saudi Arabia, which could place the
entire Saudi monarchy and state into
jeopardy. Thus, to prevent that from
ever happening, the Saudis decided to
bankroll Saddam to keep the Iranian
revolution contained within just Iran,
and they have worked tirelessly ever
since to do whatever they can to bottle
Iran up. After the Iran-Iraq War
concluded in a stalemate without any
changes made to the borders in 1988,
Saddam requested that Kuwait forgive the
$65 billion worth of loans that they had
given him to fight against Iran, and
after they refused, Saddam went on to
utilize Iraq's theoretical historical
claim to Kuwait and invaded that country
next just 2 years later in 1990,
annexing it and adding all of its own
oil reserves into Iraq proper. The Iraqi
conquest of Kuwait suddenly doubled the
amount of oil reserves that Saddam
controlled and placed him personally in
control of nearly a fifth of all the
known oil reserves in the world. Then,
the Iraqi army began lining up on the
Kuwaiti border with Saudi Arabia next, a
stone's throw away from the massive oil
fields in Saudi Arabia. It appeared
quite obvious that Saddam was planning
on using the Iraqi army to invade Saudi
Arabia next and conquer their oil fields
as well, which would have further
boosted his control over the world
supply of oil to nearly 45% of it, which
would have made Saddam Hussein the
master of global oil and given him the
fuel he needed to continue on with his
ultimate ambition of unifying the Arab
world beneath his authority and finally
overturning the map drawn up by Sykes
and Picot.
Not willing to allow any of that to
happen, however, the United States
gathered together a massive military
coalition of 32 nations and militarily
intervened against him during the Gulf
War of 1990 to 91, which rapidly ejected
the Iraqi military from Kuwait and
liberated the nation once again. The map
of Sykes and Picot was once again
restored. Afterwards, the United States
began fully stepping into the role as
the new primary security guarantor of
the Persian Gulf and its oil supplies in
order to make sure that the source of
half of the world's oil would remain
stable and accessible. The United States
Fifth Fleet was reactivated and
headquartered in Bahrain, providing the
US with a big incentive alongside of the
Saudis to keep the island out of the
hands of revolutionary Iranian
influence, while the United States Air
Force set up a massive new air base at
Al Udeid in Qatar. Shortly after that,
Jordan became the second Arab state in
the world to make peace with Israel when
they recognized the Jewish state in
1994. But the increasing setbacks for
secular Arab nationalism in the Middle
East and the growing presence and
legitimacy of the United States and
Israel in the region gave rise to a new
brand of Sunni Islamism in the Arab
world that rivaled both the more Shia
Islamism in Iran and the secular Arab
nationalist movements like Ba'athism in
Iraq and Syria and the previous
Nasserism in Egypt. This set the stage
for new organizations like Al-Qaeda to
emerge, who wanted to ignite a worldwide
Islamist revolution to unite the entire
Muslim world beneath a new Islamic state
that would fully encompass all of the
Muslim lands and finally do away with
the borders and terms of Sykes and Picot
once and for all. This newest challenge
to the map of the Middle East set by
Sykes and Picot would eventually evolve
even further into the form of ISIS, an
even more radical Sunni Islamist
organization with roots in Al-Qaeda that
for a time in 2014 [music] and 2015
exploded onto the world stage with a
series of conquests across the border
between Iraq and Syria, a border that
had been set by Sykes and Picot a
century before their time in 1916, and a
border which they were adamant they were
going to finally be the ones to destroy,
just like many others before them and
probably like many more in the future.
Before we get into the next video of
this compilation, I wanted to suggest
some other relevant videos I produced
that weren't able to make it into here,
like my documentaries I produced
covering the wars waged by Saddam
Hussein against Iran and Kuwait, the
American invasion of Iraq in 2003, the
20-year-long American occupation of
Afghanistan and the eventual return of
power of the Taliban again, the first
and second civil wars in Libya, the long
civil war in Syria as well as the
Russian intervention there, the earlier
civil war in Lebanon, the long conflict
between Turkey and the Kurds, and the
rapid rise and fall of ISIS across Iraq
and Syria, along with many, many others.
And you can go and watch all of these
other videos that I've produced about
the making of the modern Middle East on
Nebula, the sponsor of this compilation
that helps fund all of my videos and
helps to make all of this possible. And
in addition to all of my exclusive
content like this that's only available
on Nebula, we have more than 200 other
creators on the platform right now, many
of whom are also producing exclusive and
early content like Tom Scott, Lindsay
Ellis, Real Engineering, Wendover
Productions, and Jetlag, and so, so many
others you probably already are familiar
with. We also have absolutely no ads and
no AI on Nebula either, which is why I
treat Nebula as my own personal
entertainment refuge away from the ads
and AI that are increasingly choking the
rest of the internet these days. And
best of all, when you follow the link
that's down below in the description at
nebula.tv/reallifelore,
you can go to Nebula and experience all
of this right now with a great deal
we're currently running that'll get you
a whole 50% off of an annual Nebula
subscription, which will bring the cost
for you down to just $30 for the entire
year or $2.50 per month, a fraction of
other streaming platforms. Giving us a
shot on Nebula is the absolute best
thing that you can do to help support my
channel and my journalism. And with
that, let's get back to the making of
the modern Middle East.
The United States and Iran have one of
the world's most complicated and
controversial relationships. The [music]
United States is the world's most
preeminent superpower with a population
of more than 320 million, while Iran is
a major power in her own right with a
population of more than 80 million.
These countries represent 4% and [music]
1% of the living human population, and
for the past 41 years, they've had
[music] absolutely zero diplomatic
relations and have come close to the
brink of total war on more than one
occasion. At the beginning of 2020, war
between [music] the two sides seemed
almost inevitable. The United States
assassinated an Iranian major general in
a drone strike, and Iran retaliated by
initiating artillery strikes against
American military bases across Iraq. Had
a war broken out from there, it had the
potential to become the biggest conflict
in human history since the Second World
War. This time, that fate was thankfully
avoided, but in order to understand how
it got so close and why it could still
happen during another crisis in the
future, you've got to understand [music]
the entire history of the conflict
between America and Iran so far. And
that story begins back before the start
[music] of World War II. At the
beginning of the 20th century, oil was
first discovered within the deserts of
Iran by the British. [music]
As more and more of these discoveries
were made, it was revealed that Iran, in
fact, contained the fourth largest
proven reserves of oil anywhere on the
planet and that the country was an
undiscovered and unrealized energy
superpower. The only problem for the
British, of course, was that these
discoveries were located within Iran,
and Iran wasn't within Britain's vast
colonial empire that already spanned a
quarter of the globe. Not too worried
about that pesky little detail, Britain
negotiated a deal with Iran to share in
the massive profits that were bound to
come from the extraction of all this
oil. They created the jointly owned
Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, but it wasn't
exactly set up very fairly. [music]
Iran, the country where all of this oil
was actually located, was only entitled
to 16% of the company's profits, whereas
the other 84% of profits were going
directly to the British. By the start of
the Second World [music] War, the
Anglo-Iranian Oil Company grew to
control all of Iran's oil and had grown
to become the largest company in the
entire British Empire. But this
massively valuable asset was coming
under threats. Discontent at the
company's unfair [music] terms was
growing within Iran itself, while at the
same time in 1941, Nazi Germany invaded
the Soviet Union and opened up the
largest military front line ever seen in
human history. Iran stood geographically
at the Soviet Union's southern flank,
and [music] their intentions were
considered suspect by both the British
and the Soviets. Despite having declared
neutrality at the onset of the war,
Iran's ruling Shah, or emperor, was
widely considered by the allies to be
too friendly towards the Nazis. If Iran
were to have cooperated with the Axis,
it could have opened up another southern
front for the Soviets to deal [music]
with that would have diverted vital
troops away from the critical Eastern
Front. It could have jeopardized the
Soviet Union's own oil fields in the
Caucasus right on Iran's doorstep, and
it would have potentially placed
Britain's largest oil company in the
hands of the Nazis. So, in order to
prevent any of that from happening and
in order to ensure that Iran could be
used as a transportation corridor to get
vital supplies into the Soviet Union,
neutral Iran was invaded by both the
Soviets and the British. Vastly
outnumbered and far behind in
technology, Iran never stood a chance
and surrendered within just a week. The
old troublesome Shah was overthrown and
replaced by the invaders with his much
younger 21-year-old son, Mohammad Reza
Pahlavi, whom the Allies felt would be
far less capable of acting against their
interests. Iran was effectively occupied
for the entire Second World War by the
Allies, which eventually saw the
deployment of more than 30,000 Americans
and [music] the transportation of nearly
1/3 of all the supplies that America
sent to the Soviet Union. After the war
ended, the Allies left and ended their
occupation, but the unfair terms that
the British had established in regards
to Iran's oil came back into question.
By the early 1950s, Britain was still
taking home the majority of Iran's oil
profits, while the conditions for
Iranian oil workers and their families
remained terrible. [music] At the same
time, the British were also withholding
all of the company's financial records
from the Iranians and had refused all of
their requests that being audited. The
support for nationalizing the company
within Iran was getting overwhelmingly
massive and by 1951, Iran's
democratically elected Prime Minister,
Mohammad Mosaddegh, with unanimous
approval from the Iranian Parliament,
finally did so. Britain responded to
this by immediately embargoing all
Iranian oil and then 2 years later in
1953, Britain's MI6 and America's CIA
organized a military coup within the
country to overthrow Mosaddegh's
government. As many as 300 Iranians were
killed during the coup. Mosaddegh
himself was placed under house arrest
for the rest of his life, while the Shah
was elevated to being essentially an
authoritarian dictator within the
country. Having had his position
installed and guaranteed by Western
powers twice now, the Shah became widely
viewed in Iran as little more than a
Western puppet. And as the Cold War
developed out of the ashes of the Second
World War, Iran's strategic location at
the Soviet Union's southern flank, her
vast strategic reserves of oil, and her
authoritarian leader who owed his
position and loyalty to the West made
Iran a natural and valuable ally of the
United States for the very first time.
The Shah pursued a staunchly
pro-American and pro-Israel foreign
policy and for decades, Iran became one
of America's most important [music] Cold
War era allies. But over the decades,
the Shah's policies and cozy relations
with the West alienated much of his home
base support. [music]
He ran a vast network of secret police
within the country who arrested
thousands of political opponents and
many more, like Ayatollah Khomeini, were
exiled. Widespread torture of political
dissidents in prison was reported. He
outlawed the Iranian Communist Party. He
continued friendly relations with both
America and Israel, despite nearly none
of the rest of the Islamic world even
recognizing Israel, while he carried out
a domestic policy of modernization,
secularism, and the enfranchisement of
women. All of these policies combined
alienated Iran's leftists, the working
class, and the hardcore Shiite Muslim
conservatives and clergy. And by the
late 1970s, Iran's long-standing
political unrest had transformed into
full-scale revolution. A movie theater
was set on fire in Abadan that killed at
least 420 people, with the Shah's regime
blaming Marxist [music] and Islamist
insurgents, while many of the protesters
felt like it was more likely the Shah's
own secret police. The following month,
protesters gathered in the capital
Tehran's main square and the Shah's army
opened fire on them indiscriminately,
killing and wounding hundreds more. More
than 5 million Iranians took to the
streets demanding the Shah's abdication
and after defections from his army
became rampant, Mohammad Pahlavi
realized that his position was
impossible to maintain and he fled the
country in exile in early 1979.
The new radical Shiite Islamist
government that replaced the Shah's
regime immediately abolished the
monarchy and invited Ayatollah Khomeini
back to the country after 15 years of
exile to become Iran's new supreme
leader and the modern Islamic Republic
of Iran was born. And this new Iranian
regime was radically different from the
one that it preceded. It was a
totalitarian Shiite theocracy that was
staunchly opposed to the United States
and Israel and mass executions and
purges of political opponents and
members of the former regime were almost
immediately carried out. To the United
States and the rest of the world, Iran's
Islamic Revolution came as an enormous
shock. Almost overnight, Iran had
flipped from being one of America's most
important Middle Eastern allies to her
greatest Middle Eastern enemy. After the
Shah was overthrown, the United States
welcomed him into their country for a
cancer treatment operation and the new
Iran demanded that he be extradited back
to stand trial for the crimes that he
had committed throughout his reign
against the Iranian people. Knowing that
his return would mean a certain
execution, the United States rejected
all of Iran's demands, but that did
little to dissuade Iran's revolutionary
paranoia. Since the Shah was actively
inside America and since Western powers
had already initiated two previous coups
in the past him over the will of the
Iranian people, the paranoia was
widespread that America and the CIA
could be plotting yet another third coup
[music] attempt from within their
embassy inside Tehran. And so, in
November of 1979, thousands of Iranian
revolutionaries and students stormed the
American embassy and took 52 American
diplomats and civilians as hostages.
America eventually sent the Shah away to
Egypt, while the Carter administration
worked for months to secure the
hostages' release. But when diplomacy
went nowhere, Carter authorized a raid
by the United States Army Rangers in
April of 1980 to attempt a rescue
operation. But the raid turned into a
disaster. Co-named Operation Eagle Claw,
a helicopter crashed into a transport
plane before any contact with the
Iranians was even made and eight
American soldiers lost their lives.
Carter ordered the mission to be
abandoned and the hostages remained
under Iranian control. It was at this
point that the United States decided to
sever all diplomatic relations with
Iran's new regime and they have been
frozen ever since. But a few months
later, something else incredible and
unexpected happened. In September of
1980, Saddam Hussein's Iraq launched an
all-out invasion of conquest into Iran.
For years preceding this, Saddam had
wanted Iraq to overtake and supplant
Iran as the dominant power in the
oil-rich Persian Gulf. But they were
never capable of doing anything about it
because Iran had a colossally larger
military and they had the support of
America and Israel, all of which made
her vastly more powerful. But after Iran
was thrown into chaos by her revolution
and regime change with massive purges
and executions of government officials
and after she was abandoned by both
America and Israel and was left without
any major foreign allies, Saddam
calculated that now was better than ever
to take advantage and attack. Iraq
expected a rapid victory, but the war
that followed turned into an 8-year-long
stalemate that most resembled the
Western Front of World War I. After the
massive Iraqi invasion, Iran was forced
to re-evaluate the American hostage
situation and they agreed to release all
52 back into US custody after holding
them for 444
days. America levied heavy economic
sanctions upon Iran as a consequence and
then began heavily supplying Saddam and
Iraq in their war effort that they hoped
would destabilize Iran even further. The
Iran-Iraq War would ultimately prove to
be one of the largest and the bloodiest
of the 20th century's second half with
as many as 400,000
Iranians losing their lives across the
front line owing in part to the
widespread deployment of chemical
weapons and landmines from Iraq, who was
being heavily supplied and supported
with conventional weapons by the United
States. Throughout the war, the US
contends that Hezbollah, a Shia Islamist
militia organization operating out of
Lebanon who is a client of Iran, carried
out multiple anti-American terror
attacks across the region. In 1983, they
carried out a bombing of the US embassy
in Beirut, which killed 17 Americans and
later that same year, they carried out
another massive truck bombing attack
against the barracks of a military
compound in Lebanon, which killed a
further 241 American and 58 French
soldiers. These events and others
contributed to the United States placing
Iran on their state sponsors of
terrorism list the following year in
1984. By April of 1988, the Iran-Iraq
War was still raging and Iran had mined
a large section of the Persian Gulf in
order to counter the Iraqi Navy. An
American frigate who happened to be
passing through struck one of these
mines and became severely damaged and
almost sank, but with no loss of life.
Regardless, America decided to initiate
a retaliatory attack against Iranian
targets and initiated Operation Praying
Mantis. It was the largest US naval
combat operation seen since the Second
World War and it saw two American
surface groups launching coordinated
strikes that blew up two Iranian
offshore oil platforms and sank six of
their warships. The attack destroyed or
severely damaged half of Iran's entire
fleet and killed 56 Iranians, while
resulting in only two American deaths.
Just 3 months later in July of 1988, an
American cruiser strayed into Iranian
territorial waters and received warning
shots fired from Iranian speedboats. At
the same time, Iran Air Flight 655 that
was taking its normal flight route above
from Tehran to Dubai and was at this
point flying over Iran's territorial
waters above the Strait of Hormuz. The
American cruiser misidentified this
commercial aircraft as an Iranian
fighter jet and assuming that they could
have been under attack, they launched a
missile that targeted and then
completely destroyed the whole plane.
There were 290
people on board that flight and 254 of
them were Iranians. None of them
survived the missile strike [music] and
it was the deadliest aviation shoot down
incident in history until the horrible
shoot down of Malaysia Airlines Flight
17 over Ukraine by pro-Russian rebels
more than a quarter century later. These
deadly events between both sides sharply
escalated tensions between America and
Iran and each felt that the other had
done grievous harm towards them. In
1995, the Clinton administration enacted
a total embargo on all dealings with
Iran by any American-based company,
which effectively killed all trade
between both countries. In 1996, the
Iranian client Hezbollah [music] carried
out yet another terror bombing strike
against a US target in Saudi Arabia.
This time killing 19 American Air Force
personnel and wounding nearly 500
others. And then, 5 years after that,
came the September 11th attacks. Just
[music] 4 months after 9/11, US
President Bush made his Axis of Evil
speech in which he lumped Iran, Saddam's
Iraq, and North Korea all together as an
axis of evil conspiring against America.
Just a little more than a year after
that speech, the United States used the
pretext of Saddam possessing weapons of
mass destruction to invade Iraq and
completely toppled his regime in around
a month. No weapons of mass destruction
were ever uncovered and the message sent
to both Iran and North Korea was clear
[music] as day. It was either develop
nuclear weapons or you would be next.
North Korea managed to successfully test
an atomic bomb just 3 years after the
American-led invasion of Iraq. While
Iran hastily carried out their own
nuclear weapons research as well.
However, the United States made it clear
that a nuclear-armed Iran would never be
tolerated and a combination of sanctions
and diplomacy were used for years to try
and convince Iran to stop. By 2015,
[music]
the Obama administration had
successfully negotiated the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, better
known colloquially as the Iran nuclear
deal. The treaty's terms are complex,
but the TLDR is that the US agreed to
end a sweeping series of sanctions they
had previously placed upon Iran. While
Iran agreed to give up their pursuit of
nuclear research and allowed foreign
inspections to routinely investigate
them. Iran's and America's relationship
was beginning to show some signs [music]
of rapprochement. But then, things took
another curveball. In 2016, Donald Trump
was elected the new president of the
United States on a platform that
included a vow to fully withdraw the US
from the Iran nuclear deal and to
reinstate tougher economic sanctions. In
2018, [music] Trump carried through with
these campaign promises and Iran
counter-threatened that they would
continue on with their nuclear program
and even close the Strait of Hormuz to
international shipping if things
escalated any further, which would have
completely crashed the global oil
economy. Relations between the two were
back to being tense and then things got
even worse the next year. In May and
June of 2019, several merchant ships
traveling through the Persian Gulf were
damaged in two separate violent
incidents. The West blamed Iran and then
Iran denied all involvement. In June,
Iran shot down an American drone that
was flying over the Strait of Hormuz and
tensions increased even further. And
then in July, an Iranian oil tanker was
seized by the UK as it was passing
through the Strait of Gibraltar on the
grounds that it was shipping oil to the
Bashar al-Assad regime in Syria in
direct violation of EU sanctions. Iran
countered this by capturing a British
oil tanker and taking its crew hostage
as it was later passing through the
Persian Gulf. Both sides eventually
released the other's ships and crew, but
it was clear that tensions were reaching
a boiling point. And then, they
dramatically escalated near the end of
the year. On the 27th of December 2019,
a rocket artillery attack from some
assailant on America's K1 military base
in Iraq left one US civilian contractor
dead and four other soldiers wounded.
America blamed the attack on Hezbollah
and other Shiite Islamist militias
supported by Iran, though both Hezbollah
and Iran denied all responsibility. At
this point, there were about 5,000 US
troops who were stationed in Iraq who
were helping in the ongoing fight
against ISIL. And 2 days later on the
29th, they decided to initiate a
retaliatory strike against Hezbollah's
weapons depots and command centers
across both Iraq and Syria. These
American airstrikes killed 25
Hezbollah-affiliated militiamen and
wounded nearly 60 others. Escalating
things even further a couple days after
that on December the 31st, Iran-backed
militiamen stormed and attacked the
United States Embassy in Baghdad. The
embassy was heavily vandalized, but
nobody on either side was killed and the
US blamed Iran once again for the
provocation. And then came the 3rd of
January 2020 when the already high
tensions skyrocketed to levels never
seen before. Qassem Soleimani, an
Iranian major general widely believed to
be the second most powerful figure
within the Iranian regime, had just
arrived in Baghdad on a flight. He was
scheduled to meet with Iraq's prime
minister later on in the day, but as he
departed the Baghdad airport in a convoy
of vehicles, a US drone that had been
hovering nearby overhead fired a series
of missiles that completely destroyed
them. This missile strike had been
personally authorized and ordered by
President Donald Trump himself and
resulted in the deaths of Soleimani and
nine others. This event profoundly
changed the crisis between Iran and the
United States. It was the first time
that America had assassinated a major
military leader of a major foreign
country since the plot to kill Isoroku
Yamamoto of the Japanese Imperial Navy
back in 1943, who had been the
mastermind of the Pearl Harbor attacks.
Two days later, Iran announced that it
would no longer abide by any of the
terms of the 2015 nuclear deal and
demanded that Iraq remove all of the
American presence from their country.
And then, on the 8th of January, 5 days
after Soleimani's death, Iran launched
its own retaliatory strike against
America. Co-named Operation Martyr
Soleimani, Iran initiated multiple
ballistic missile strikes against two US
military bases within Iraq and the
entire world held its breath. This was
the closest that America and Iran had
ever come to full-scale war and the
crisis could have easily escalated into
that. America had already rapidly
deployed thousands of soldiers to the
Persian Gulf from the US East Coast in
the days between Soleimani's death and
this Iranian artillery attack, but
thankfully, nobody was killed by it. The
bases experienced significant damage to
buildings and infrastructure, but
everybody present remained alive. And
this was sort of a godsend because it
gave both Iran and America the
opportunity to de-escalate [music]
without losing any face. Iran got to
look strong and powerful by firing
rockets at American targets [music] and
without any casualties, America was
given the option not to retaliate, which
is what they chose to do. [music]
Unfortunately though, tragedy still
managed to find a way to strike. While
Iran likely designed the attack
intentionally to not cause any American
casualties, Iran didn't necessarily know
that the US wasn't going to retaliate
[music]
and their anti-air batteries across the
country were on high alert for any kind
of response. One of these missile
batteries detected what they believed to
be an American cruise missile on their
radar and they opened fire on it with
two surface-to-air missiles. It turned
out that the target wasn't a cruise
missile at all, but was just a regularly
scheduled commercial airliner that had
just taken off from Tehran International
Airport [music] mere minutes before. The
plane in question was Ukraine
International Airlines Flight 752
traveling from Tehran to Kiev with 176
people on board. [music]
The Iranian missiles completely
destroyed the plane and killed everybody
on board, including 82 Iranian and 63
Canadian citizens. Initially, the
Iranian government denied all
responsibility and attempted to cover
the disaster up by blaming the crash on
technical faults with the plane itself.
[music]
But after raising suspicion when they
wouldn't allow any investigators access
to the crash site, the government
finally admitted to mistakenly shooting
the plane down a few days later on
January 11th. That attempted cover-up
sparked massive protests across Iran and
against the regime. And the brink of war
against the United States had just
narrowly been avoided. Hundreds of
innocent people died as a result of the
conflict between Iran and the United
States in 2020. [music] But of course,
it could have always been far worse. Had
the conflict escalated by any number of
countless different ways, all-out war
could have broken out that would have
resulted in the deaths of many, many
more. I only hope that peace between my
country and Iran can be maintained in
the future. [music] But at the same
time, I'm aware of how precarious this
peace is [music]
and the history behind all of this. And
I'm fearful that one day in the future,
we might not get as relatively lucky as
we did at the beginning of 2020.
This is a stretch of water that's only a
tad more than 30 mi wide. It's so small
that you couldn't even fit Luxembourg
inside of it, and yet these 30 mi make
up the most important location to
understand in the entire [snorts] known
universe. By controlling these 30 mi,
you can effectively rule the entire
world, and by closing them down, you can
effectively destroy the world. And this
is why. The ocean spans most of our
planet's surface, about 70% of it to be
precise. In order to transport goods
from one of Earth's many continents to
another, this vast ocean that takes up
70% of the planet has to be traveled
across. And in the 21st century, there
are many ways to do so. Simply using an
airplane to fly across in mere hours
might be how you choose to do it, but
airplanes are expensive, especially the
more and more heavy an object it is that
you're moving. So, when it comes to
cargo, 80% of the 21st century's global
trade is still being carried out the way
that it generally always has been for
thousands of years now, by ship. At any
given normal time, there are around
50,000 merchant vessels carrying as much
as 6 million containers full of cargo
and goods all across the world's oceans
and between all the world's continents.
These networks and streams of ships that
you see moving in lines across the
world's surface here are the literal
arteries that power the beating heart of
the 21st century global economy. And
unfortunately, the world's oceans aren't
very easy to navigate through. The
geographic placement of the world's
continents, islands, and land masses
have created numerous natural choke
points that these trade arteries have no
other choice but to move through. And
when these choke points become blocked
by whatever means, they can cause a
veritable stroke upon the world economy.
This is exactly what happened earlier
this year when one of the most important
of these, the Suez Canal, was blocked
for several days when a cargo ship
became unexpectedly stuck in the middle,
which blocked nearly 10 billion dollars
worth of global trade and caused
widespread shipping and logistical
delays across the entire world from
North America to Australia. But there
are other strategic maritime choke
points to consider across the world as
well. The Panama Canal controls the flow
of trade between the Atlantic and
Pacific Ocean across the American
landmass. The Cape of Good Hope controls
the flow of trade around the African
continent. The Strait of Gibraltar
controls the flow between the
Mediterranean and the Atlantic, the
Danish Straits between the Baltic and
the North Sea, the Turkish Straits
between the Mediterranean and Black
Seas, and the Strait of Malacca between
the Pacific and Indian Oceans. However,
none of these are as important nor as
dangerous as the Strait of Hormuz here
for many, many critical reasons. First
among them, it's the only possible way
for ships to move back and forth between
the Persian Gulf in the west and the
Gulf of Oman in the east, which then
leads out to the greater global ocean.
The Persian Gulf is particularly
important for this equation because
eight countries share some of its
coastline: Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi
Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab
Emirates, and Oman. And for four of
those countries, the only maritime
access they have is within the Persian
Gulf, which means that the 30-mi wide
Strait of Hormuz is the only possible
location they can pass through in order
to access the world's oceans. And if you
know anything at all about the Middle
East and the Gulf countries, you know
that they're pretty much all completely
loaded in oil. But oil is only part of
what makes the Persian Gulf, and the
Strait of Hormuz especially, so
critically important. Oil [music] is
still the lifeblood of the modern
world's economy. Around a third of our
energy worldwide is produced by using
it, and every single day humanity
consumes more than 9 million barrels of
it. Oil is still by far the most common
source of energy for human civilization
in the 21st century. And as a
non-renewable, it can't simply be
produced. [music]
Oil is a resource that can only be
extracted from where it already exists,
and [music] as it happens, it's not
naturally found in too many parts of the
world. Around the Persian Gulf basin,
across these dozens of oil fields marked
in green, you can find roughly half of
the entire planet's proven reserves of
oil, including the single largest oil
field in the world here in Saudi Arabia,
at Ghawar, which all on its own produces
nearly 6% [music] of the entire world's
oil supply. There are dozens of
fabulously rich oil fields here that
stretch across all eight of the
countries that border [music] the
Persian Gulf. But that's not the only
valuable resource that can be found
here. Marked in red, you can also find
roughly 40% of the world's proven
reserves of natural gas. Natural gas is
the world's third most common source of
energy, behind oil and coal, and more
than a fifth of the world's energy is
produced by using it. Qatar itself
produces the highest amount of liquefied
natural gas in the world, [music]
and according to British Petroleum, Iran
possesses the world's largest reserves
of natural gas. Between all of these
combined reserves, there is more oil and
natural gas in the seas of the Persian
Gulf and the land immediately
surrounding it than anywhere else on the
planet Earth. Since a third of all the
world's oil production is currently
taking place around the Gulf, and a
third of the world's energy is powered
by oil, and since a further fifth of
natural gas production takes place
around the Gulf, and about a fifth of
the world's energy is powered by gas, it
can therefore be said that about 15%
of the entire planet's [music] energy
supply comes from around the Persian
Gulf, and largely behind the Strait of
Hormuz. This is why the 30 mi of water
here is so insanely important, because
roughly 15%
of all the energy that humanity is
collectively consuming right now [music]
largely has no other choice but to pass
through it. No other choke point in the
21st century's global transportation
network can come anywhere even close
[music]
to that level of critical importance.
[snorts]
And it doesn't help that navigating
through it is pretty geographically
difficult. There are eight major islands
located inside of the strait, which must
be avoided by any ships, seven of which
are de facto controlled by Iran. These
three strategically placed ones are
contested by the United Arab Emirates,
but the Iranian military has occupied
them since the 1970s, so they're
effectively controlled by Iran. These
areas of water highlighted are too
shallow for any tanker to traverse,
while these areas separately highlighted
have very limited visibility due to the
obstructions from islands and land. Dust
storms, morning fog, and haze can all
make visibility within the strait even
more challenging and are particularly
common events during the summer months.
The UN has established a special traffic
separation scheme for tankers and other
ships to take while traveling through to
avoid the most risk. This scheme
consists of only two 2-mi wide shipping
lanes, one for incoming and another for
outgoing traffic, while each is only
separated by a 2-mi wide buffer zone.
The whole route travels through Iranian,
Emirati, and Omani territorial waters at
various times, and all of the world's
largest ships must pass through them and
limited capability to avoid any
unexpected obstructions that might or
might not crop up. The overwhelming
majority of all the oil that flows out
of the Gulf travels towards East Asia,
76%
of it, [music] and most of that travels
to only five countries. China is the
world's largest importer of petroleum
and the world's second largest economy,
and is heavily dependent on the oil flow
coming out from the Strait of Hormuz,
[music]
because it imports about 45%
of its supply from the eight countries
around the Persian Gulf. Japan, the
world's third largest economy, is even
more critically dependent and addicted.
Infamously barren of most natural
resources that are required for an
industrial society, Japan has always
been forced to seek them out abroad and
away from their home islands, at times
through war, while at other times
through trade. Currently, they rely on
trade. While oil and liquefied natural
gas power more than 60% [music]
of Japan's energy needs, nearly 100% of
all of it is imported, and nearly 80% of
that is transported by tankers from the
Persian Gulf and through the Strait of
Hormuz. Therefore, nearly half of
Japan's energy, the fuel that powers the
world's third largest economy, has to
travel through the 30 mi of water at the
Strait of Hormuz. And South Korea, the
world's 10th largest global economy, has
similar dependencies. They import nearly
70% of their oil from the Persian Gulf
states. And since oil powers more than
40% of their energy needs, nearly a
third of South Korea's energy supplies
also have no other choice but to be
delivered by tankers that are coming
through the 30-mi wide Strait of Hormuz.
Were the strait ever to be obstructed or
shut down for very long, the world's
second, third, and 10th largest
economies would immediately come to a
screeching halt. The primary source of
revenue for all eight countries around
the Persian Gulf would also immediately
dry up, and the ripple effect from there
would almost certainly crash the entire
global economy. And in that event, there
aren't many options for getting the oil
and natural gas around the strait. Saudi
Arabia does have a crude oil and
liquefied natural gas pipeline that they
can use to transport limited amounts
from the rich fields around the Persian
Gulf over to their ports on the Red Sea,
while the United Arab Emirates has a
similar pipeline that they can use to
transport further limited amounts to the
other side of their country on the Gulf
of Oman, and away from the Strait of
Hormuz, but these amounts are all
limited, while Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait,
and Iraq possess no such ability. At a
maximum, it's believed that these
pipelines can only divert about 20% of
the oil coming out of the Persian Gulf
around the Strait of Hormuz, and
building any more oil pipeline
infrastructure is expensive. All of this
means that the 30-mi wide Strait of
Hormuz is the most important choke point
[music] in the entire world for the
global economy to function smoothly. And
as a result, it's attracted considerable
attention of countless empires and
foreign powers from the outside, most
notably the United States. The US
maintains dozens of bases across Oman,
the UAE, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain,
Kuwait, and Iraq, seven of the eight
countries around the Gulf, save for
Iran. This includes an air force base in
Qatar, and the United States' [music]
fifth fleet being further headquartered
within Bahrain, which is generally
composed of more than 15,000 sailors,
two aircraft carriers, dozens of other
vessels, and between them and the air
force base, countless aircraft. As the
current largest single source for all of
humanity's energy, all of this presence
in the area from the United States is
generally in place to ensure that the
oil continues flowing, and to counter
Iran's influence over on the other side
of the Strait. The United States and
Iran have had no official diplomatic
relations for more than 40 years now,
since 1980. And relations between the
two sides of the Strait have been
continuously tense. In the event of a
war breaking out, Iran has made numerous
threats over the years to close the
Strait of Hormuz from their side over to
Oman, which, if successful, would
shatter the world economy, and that's
enough of a threat to always make
America, or any other foreign power,
think twice. But Iran's capability to do
that is realistically pretty limited.
While the Iranian military is powerful,
America's is a lot more powerful, and
the presence of the fifth fleet so close
by in Bahrain would almost guarantee
American naval and air superiority
almost immediately across the entire
Strait. Iran knows that their navy and
air force couldn't compete though, so as
a result, most of their focus over the
past decade has been centered around
building air defenses and missile
batteries across the coast that could
simply bombard any ships passing
through. Iran also possesses a massive
arsenal of thousands of maritime mines
that they could theoretically quickly
fill the 30-mi wide Strait with that
would ground all trading activity
through it to a halt for who knows how
long. Theoretically, Iran could probably
shut the Strait down, but doing so would
almost certainly invoke a very sharp
response from a coalition of countries
who would be staunchly opposed to it,
likely led by the United States and
Saudi Arabia. That conflict wouldn't be
very pretty, and it's come dangerously
close to already happening. Just two
years ago in 2019, the United States
began a military build-up around the
Persian Gulf, while simultaneously
withdrawing from the Iran nuclear deal
and imposing new sanctions upon the
country. The conflict escalated from
there to the point where an Iranian
major general was assassinated in a US
drone strike at the beginning of 2020,
and led from there to Iran bombarding US
military bases across Iraq with rockets
and artillery. It was the closest that
America and Iran have ever come so far
to a full-out war, and the tension still
hasn't gone away.
There's 62 countries around the world
today who have small populations less
than 3 million people. Because of their
small size, they're all generally
limited in their power and influence to
their immediate surroundings. And even
then, in the case of places like
Armenia, Moldova, or the Gambia, they're
usually minor players even within their
own neighborhood. The fascinating
exception to this rule of thumb for the
world's smallest countries, however, is
Qatar, a small, dusty, and largely empty
peninsula no larger than the state of
Delaware that juts out from Saudi Arabia
into the Persian Gulf. While Qatar has
an overall population of around 2.8
million people, which is already smaller
than Albania, only 320,000 of them are
actually citizens of the country, while
the remaining nearly two and a half
million people are almost entirely
foreign and expatriate labor that have
come to the country from abroad. That
means that with only around 320,000
citizens, Qatar's citizen population is
only about the same size as tiny
Vanuatu, a little island country in the
Pacific Ocean. And yet, [music] despite
its tiny size in both land and people,
Qatar commands global prestige, power,
and influence on the same scale of
countries that are dozens of times
larger than it. For years now, Qatar has
often been described as the wealthiest
country in the world with the highest
GDP per capita of all the world's
nations for multiple years in a row. The
Qatari economy was larger than Ukraine's
even before the Russian invasion, and
with nearly 16 times fewer people, even
when including all the foreign labor.
The state of Qatar wields the ninth
largest sovereign wealth fund in the
world with assets exceeding 450 billion
dollars, including a large 10 and 1/2%
stake in the Volkswagen Group, and the
outright ownership of the Paris
Saint-Germain Football Club, the seventh
most valuable football club in the
entire world. This is all in addition to
a diversified real estate portfolio that
makes the state of Qatar the largest
single property owner in London,
including a 95% stake in the tallest
building in Western Europe, the Shard,
100% ownership of the Harrods department
store, a majority stake in the Canary
Wharf financial center, and a 20% stake
in London's Heathrow Airport, the
seventh busiest airport in the world by
international passenger traffic. This
sovereign wealth fund's assets equate to
more than 1.4 million dollars per
citizen of Qatar, by far the largest of
any sovereign wealth fund in the world.
The state-owned airline Qatar Airways is
one of the largest and the most
influential in the entire global
aviation industry. Ranked by assets,
Qatar Airways is the ninth largest
airline in the world, and is roughly
equivalent in scale to Air France-KLM,
and they have even greater revenue
numbers than Turkish Airlines. The
state-owned media company Al Jazeera is
one of the largest public media
conglomerate in the world, second only
to the BBC in the number of news bureaus
located across the world. And perhaps
most infamously of all, they are by far
the smallest country and the first in
the Arab world to ever host the FIFA
World Cup, which is currently ongoing as
of the release of this video. The Qatar
of today is a fabulously wealthy country
for its small size, and with that wealth
also comes enormous global influence and
power. And as a result, I would argue
that Qatar is by far [music] the most
overpowered country in the 21st century
world, with a level of influence ranking
it as a middle power alongside states
that are many, many times larger than
it, like Turkey, South Korea, the
Netherlands, or Canada. And they're only
going to continue getting even more
overpowered as this decade advances. But
it wasn't always so certain to be this
way, because Qatar only really started
getting rich and overpowered pretty
recently in the 1990s. For thousands of
years before then, hardly anybody would
have ever been able to guess how Qatar's
fortunes would eventually turn out,
because geographically, Qatar possesses
very few advantages to help it become
powerful. It's just a small, dusty, flat
peninsula covered in deserts with scarce
arable land, little rainfall, and
without even a single river to use for
fresh water or irrigation. The prospects
for anyone living here were bleak for
thousands of years, and the only way
anybody could really make a living was
limited either to fishing or to diving
for pearls in the Gulf. And
consequently, hardly anybody actually
did live here. Qatar was an isolated,
impoverished, and underdeveloped
backwater for basically all of human
history until things finally began
changing when oil happened to be
discovered in 1939 across the Dukhan
field here, found across the westernmost
edge of the peninsula. But of course,
the same year it was discovered was the
same year that World War II began, so it
was never really developed until a
decade later in 1949. By the 1950s,
Qatar was producing a modest amount of
oil from this field, but it paled in
comparison to the gigantic oil fields
that had been found nearby across Saudi
Arabia and Kuwait. The largest oil field
ever discovered in the world is the
Ghawar field less than 150 km away from
the Qatari border within Saudi Arabia,
and it alone contains nearly twice the
amount of oil found across all of Qatar.
But after scouring across their tiny
peninsula, the Qataris never discovered
any other significant oil reserves on
land, and that pushed Qatar and their
partnered Western oil companies to begin
searching for offshore oil reserves
around the peninsula within their
territorial waters in the Gulf. Several
were found, but again, none of them were
anything like the huge earth-shattering
finds that the Saudis and Kuwaitis were
making just nearby. It would eventually
turn out that Qatar had the 14th largest
reserves of oil in the world, a
significant asset and a boon for the
people of the tiny peninsula. But in the
grand scheme of the Persian Gulf, these
oil reserves were still fairly small.
They were but a quarter of the reserves
found in Kuwait and the United Arab
Emirates, and only a tenth of those
found just next door in Saudi Arabia. If
it was only ever going to rely on oil,
Qatar would never grow to be as rich as
its neighbors. But naturally, Qatar
wanted to strike it big like the rest of
them, and so they kept on searching for
more. And then in 1971, they would
finally end up making the geologic
discovery of the century, and it
wouldn't even be oil. With the
assistance of Shell, what they ended up
discovering was this, a big offshore
natural gas field in the middle of the
Persian Gulf, split roughly 60/40
between their own exclusive economic
zone and Iran's. Their side of the field
became known as the North Field, while
Iran's became known as the South Pars
Field,
>> [music]
>> and its discovery would ultimately
change both countries' destinies
forever. Because this field is by far
the largest natural gas field ever
discovered in the world. [music] It is
so enormous that the Qatari side of the
field alone contains an estimated fifth
of all the entire world's natural gas
reserves. This single field overnight
catapulted little Qatar into the number
three position in the world for natural
gas reserves, just behind Iran and
Russia, and nearly double the natural
gas reserves found across the entire
United States. Its discovery would one
day transform Qatar into the financial
and economic juggernaut that we know it
as today, and it is the primary source
of Qatar's OPEC status on the world
stage. But, when it was first
discovered, the Qataris and Shell were
actually disappointed that it wasn't oil
and thought it was almost useless. You
see, back at that time in the '70s, the
natural gas industry was completely
different than it is today. Natural gas
is, of course, a gas, and that means it
takes up a lot of volume. Exporting
natural gas to somewhere else while it's
still in its gaseous state takes up a
lot of space, and that means that
exporting the gas by ship is incredibly
inefficient and doesn't make any
financial sense. This is why the
liquefied natural gas, or LNG, business
was born shortly after the Second World
War. By converting natural gas into a
liquid, it takes up only 1/600 of the
same volume it does when it's in its
gaseous [music] state, and that means
that LNG can be transported in huge
quantities by tanker ship from any
source to any destination in the world,
in theory.
The problem with LNG has always been
that it's the most expensive way to
transport natural gas because of all the
complicated and advanced infrastructure
that needs to be put in place to get it
all running. You need complicated
refrigeration plants at the source of
the gas that can cool it down to its
liquid state at -161°
C.
No easy task to do around the Persian
Gulf, which has some of the hottest
average temperatures in the world. You
need to commission specialized
refrigerated tanker ships that can
continue keeping the gas that cold for
weeks to months on end while they carry
it across the world's oceans. And you
need another specialized plant at the
final destination that can safely
transform the LNG back into gas to be
used by consumers. It costs billions of
dollars to get all of this set up before
the first shipments even arrive, and
worse, in the 1970s, there was nowhere
near enough of a market or a demand for
LNG. Europe received plentiful cheaper
gas from pipelines coming in from places
like Russia, Norway, and the
Netherlands, meaning that expensive LNG
was not going to be competitive there.
But, the increasingly advanced and
developing island economies of East Asia
were a completely different matter
altogether. Japan, in particular, is an
island nation that is bereft of fossil
fuels, meaning that as their economy
developed and their demand for gas
increased, their geography was better
suited towards importing gas as LNG from
container ships rather than through long
pipelines built across or beneath the
ocean. The same became true of Taiwan
and eventually South Korea as well,
which effectively functions as an island
as well for the purpose of importing
energy from abroad because of North
Korea and the ocean to their other three
sides. All three of these rising East
Asian economies' demand for LNG began to
grow over the years, and at first, their
demand was almost entirely met by nearby
producers in Southeast Asia, Indonesia,
Malaysia, and Brunei. This was the world
that Qatar and Shell found themselves in
in 1971 when they suddenly discovered
the biggest natural gas field in the
world, and they initially decided that
they couldn't economically compete for
any of the market in Asia. Building up
an LNG industry from scratch was thought
to be too costly and too risky, and
building out long pipelines to markets
in Europe was just too ridiculous and
expensive to even consider. They had
both hoped that their discovery was oil
because, unlike natural gas, oil is
naturally a liquid, and so it's far less
costly to just load it up on tankers and
ship it around the world. So, rather
than developing Qatar's natural gas in
the North Field, Shell abandoned the
project, and with global oil prices
skyrocketing following the Arab oil
embargoes in the '70s, Qatar continued
to focus on its smaller oil reserves for
the next 20 years. And then, everything
would begin to change again in the late
1980s. In 1986, the price of oil
unexpectedly crashed by more than 50%
production and revenue from oil sales in
Qatar crashed alongside it, and the
Qatari economy, which almost entirely
relied upon selling oil at the time, was
put into a crisis mode. By the 1990s,
with oil prices and revenue still low,
the Qataris began turning their
attention back towards all of that
natural gas they found 20 years
previously in the biggest field in the
world. And at the same time, global
demand for natural gas was beginning to
increase. Natural gas emits 50% less CO2
than coal when it's burned for energy,
and about 30% less than oil while
releasing less air pollution as well,
making it a desirable and slightly
cleaner fuel to use for electricity for
nations weary of climate change and
pollution, or for nations seeking a
transitory fuel source while they move
towards full carbon neutrality and green
energies like wind or solar. And at the
same time, the cost of building out LNG
infrastructure had dramatically come
down after more than 20 years of
continuous technological developments
and understanding. In 1995, the
ambitious son of the ruling Qatari emir
launched a bloodless coup d'état against
his father and overthrew him. And it
would be under his leadership that
little Qatar would be transformed into a
world power. Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani
strongly believed in the potential of
the natural gas reserves in the North
Field and in the growing LNG business.
Equipped with billions of dollars worth
of investment secured from Western
energy companies like ExxonMobil, the
Qataris and their partners set out to
build no less than the largest and the
most competitive LNG business the world
had ever seen. Backed up by the single
largest gas field ever discovered, the
Qataris managed to increase the scale of
their LNG operations to
never-before-seen heights. They
constructed the largest artificial
harbor in the world for their Ras Laffan
Industrial City, which became their
primary production and export center for
Qatari LNG. They commissioned larger and
larger LNG container ships that could
carry increasingly larger volumes of LNG
to customers abroad. And by 1996, Qatar
was exporting their first shipments of
LNG through the Strait of Hormuz and
abroad to global markets. It would end
up revolutionizing both Qatar and the
entire world in the process. Within just
10 years of the beginning their
operations by 2006, Qatar had already
overtaken all of its LNG competitors
like Malaysia and Indonesia to become
the largest exporter of LNG in the
world. With the bulk of their shipments
eating into the market share in the East
Asian economies of Japan, South Korea,
and Taiwan. South Korea became their
single largest customer, and they still
continue to purchase roughly 27% of
their entire natural gas supply from
Qatar alone. And the vast revenues that
these countries were paying for Qatari
LNG flooded back into the coffers of the
Qatari government, which, of course,
made them mind-bogglingly rich. This is
a chart of the gross domestic product
per capita in Qatar from 1987 to the
present. This year, 1996, is when Qatar
first began exporting LNG to the world
market, and you can clearly see how
immediately afterwards, their wealth
began to absolutely skyrocket to the
point in 2006 where they became the
largest LNG exporter in the world. Tens
of billions of dollars a year began
flowing directly to Qatar in exchange
for their shipments of LNG. But, all of
this newfound wealth came with a
problem. Qatar was growing too
over-dependent on a single source of
income and was transforming into the
world's first LNG state. By the 2010s,
70% of the entire government's revenue,
60% [music] of the entire country's GDP,
and 85% of their export earnings were
all simply coming from the LNG and
petroleum business. If the business were
to ever crash or run out of supplies,
Qatar would be forced into going back to
the impoverished, empty peninsula that
it had been for thousands of years
beforehand. And of course, the
government has always been aware of
this,
>> [music]
>> and so in order to diversify their
income streams and secure their future,
they began investing into other
businesses, ideas, and avenues. Qatar
Airways was founded in 1993 and expanded
with the LNG and oil money to become one
of the top 10 largest airlines in the
world today. The Qatar sovereign wealth
fund was established in 2005 as a means
to invest their massive [music] revenues
into projects, real estate, and
companies abroad to the point where
today, the fund's assets are nearly
equivalent to the entire annual GDP of
Egypt, [music] a nation of more than 100
million people. And then in 1996, the
same year they began exporting LNG, they
also founded the state-owned Al Jazeera
Media Group, translating from Arabic
into English as literally the peninsula,
the Qatar peninsula. But, Qatar still
had a low natural population base in
addition to being located in a dangerous
geopolitical neighborhood. Saddam
Hussein's Iraq had previously launched
wars of conquest into both Iran and
Kuwait in order to seize control over
their oil industries, and little Qatar
was hypothetically a much more
vulnerable target than either of those
had been. There was also the fact that
Qatar shared the largest natural gas
field in the world with Iran, which
meant that each of their governments had
to collaborate together and remain
friendly to an extent in order to safely
and mutually extract all of the gas
there, a situation that made next door
Saudi Arabia, the greatest rival of
Iran, intensely apprehensive. Qatar's
solution to defending themselves in this
precarious geopolitical neighborhood was
by simply aligning itself very closely
to the United States. At the same
[music] time as they were getting their
LNG business up and running, Qatar
invited both the American and British
militaries [music] to assist in
constructing the Al Udeid airbase in the
country, which eventually went on to
become the US military's largest base in
the entire Middle East with more than
11,000 total personnel and more than 100
operational aircraft as of today. It
became an invaluable asset for the
United States through multiple
conflicts, used as a primary airbase to
conduct operations from in Afghanistan,
Iraq, and later against ISIS in Syria.
And beyond that base, Qatar also
supplied enormous quantities of energy
supplies to many of America's most
important allies in Asia, Japan, South
Korea, [music] Taiwan, and India. This
is all in part why the Biden
administration would eventually label
tiny Qatar [music] as a major non-NATO
ally of the United States at the
beginning of 2022, a status that is
similarly bestowed upon great power
nations like Japan and Brazil with
nearly a hundred times Qatar's
population. Meanwhile, Qatar's low
population base of only a few hundred
thousand people also proved to make it
difficult to actually use all of that
money from LNG and petroleum to build
things like skyscrapers and stadiums for
the World Cup. And so to solve that
problem, Qatar began encouraging
enormous migration to the country for
low- skilled workers coming primarily
from South Asian nations like Nepal,
India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan. This is
why today, Qatar's demographic structure
is one of the strangest and the most
[music] exploitative in the entire
world. Nearly nine in 10 people in the
country today are foreign workers
without any citizenship who have
recently moved to the country from
abroad, including more than 700,000 from
India. Since the overwhelming majority
of the foreign workers who have come to
Qatar are also men, Qatar's gender
profile is by far the most lopsided in
the world with roughly three men in the
country for every one woman. And ever
since these migrations began to Qatar,
there have been countless reports of
terrible human rights abuses that have
been made against them with many
publications suggesting that the
treatment of the millions of foreign
workers in Qatar essentially amounts to
modern-day slavery. South Asian men
would be promised by Qatari officials of
high pay and good conditions and then
lured to the country where they would
then often have their passports
confiscated and with no way to leave,
forced into much lower paying labor jobs
with much worse conditions than they had
initially been promised. Over the past
decade, [music] Qatar has spent more
than 200 billion dollars of its LNG and
petroleum wealth to build out stadiums
and infrastructure for the World Cup and
put millions of their foreign laborers
to work. And according to some reports,
at least 6,500
of those workers died building
everything simply due to atrocious
working conditions. That is simply
unacceptable and it is a dark stain on
Qatar's success story and the World Cup
in general. At the same time, Qatar's
LNG wealth was also coming under threat
in the later 2010s. After an investment
of more than 250 billion dollars into
their own LNG industry, Australia
suddenly surpassed the Qataris for the
number one largest exporter of LNG at
the end of 2018. And the United States
wasn't very far behind them with
billions worth of investments into the
industry of their own. Australian and
American LNG were suddenly competing
with Qatari LNG for market share across
Asia. And not content with playing
second or even third fiddle, the Qataris
decided to double down. In 2019, they
announced a 30 billion dollar plan to
expand their LNG production from the
North Field with billions of more
dollars coming from Western energy
giants like Shell, Exxon, and Chevron
among others. The plan was that Qatar's
LNG exports would be increased by nearly
two-thirds by 2026, which hypothetically
would have enabled Qatar to regain the
position of the world's largest exporter
and to then keep it indefinitely. But
many people were worried at the time
that such a massive investment into even
more LNG production would have never
paid off with the stiff competition
growing from the Australians and the
Americans. Where would all the excess
Qatari LNG go to? The Asian market's
demand was already largely being met.
North America was growing increasingly
energy independent and less reliant on
imports. And Europe hardly bought any
LNG at all with most of their gas demand
being met by the Russians, Norwegians,
and Algerians through their pipelines.
And then, of course, everything changed
when the Russians invaded Ukraine and
the Europeans began to cut out all of
their gas imports from Russia. Suddenly,
out of nowhere, a brand new enormous
market for LNG that is roughly the same
size as Asia's market opened up to the
suppliers. And Qatar immediately became
one of the best positioned to capitalize
on it. There is perhaps no other country
in the world that will benefit more from
Russia's invasion of Ukraine than Qatar.
A flurry of high-ranking European Union
and German energy executives have now
been flying back and forth with Doha to
discuss new LNG contracts and shipments.
And now, the Qatari economy is expected
to grow by more than 4% this year alone
and it could potentially only be the
beginning. With Russian gas now being
completely locked out of the European
market, LNG replacements from elsewhere
will be highly in demand and
competitively priced. And Qatar is
currently estimating that at least half
of their ongoing LNG expansion in the
North Field will now be headed straight
for Europe by 2026, ensuring them
billions of dollars a year in extra
revenues from today and increased
leverage over European demand and
influence. Naturally, Qatar's new-found
wealth has also come with new-found
ambitions and abilities to influence the
world around them. And this has often
gotten them into trouble. Since they
share the largest natural gas field in
the world with Iran, Qatar has always
maintained that fairly close working
relationship with them out of necessity,
which, like I said before, has never sat
well with Saudi Arabia, Iran's fiercest
geopolitical rival. But Qatar's and
Saudi Arabia's foreign policies clash in
many more ways than just this. Following
the Arab Spring revolutions that swept
across the Arab world in the early
2010s, Qatar and Saudi Arabia nearly
always found themselves supporting the
opposite sides in every conflict all
throughout the region. Qatar came to
support the wave of democratic and
Islamist revolts long-standing Arab
regimes, such as by supporting the
Muslim Brotherhood's democratic rise to
power in Egypt with billions of dollars,
generous media coverage within Al
Jazeera of the uprisings in Bahrain
against the monarchy, and eventual
backing of the Tripoli-based Government
of National Accord during the Libyan
Civil War. All of which the Saudis
fiercely opposed and fought against.
There became increasing concerns within
Riyadh that Qatar's overt support for
revolutions against long-standing
autocratic regimes across the Arab world
meant that one day, they would also be
bankrolling a revolution against the
nearly century-old absolute monarchy in
Saudi Arabia with both money and
generous media coverage. By 2017, the
Saudis had had enough of their
conflicting ambitions and all on the
same day, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan,
Djibouti, Senegal, Mauritania, the
Comoros, the Maldives, and the
Saudi-supported Tobruk-based government
in Libya, as well as the Saudi-supported
Hadi government in Yemen, all announced
the severing of their diplomatic
relations with Qatar. Saudi Arabia and
the UAE went another step further by
also shutting down all of their ports to
Qatari-registered ships and shutting
down all of their airspace to the
state-owned airline, Qatar Airways. The
Saudis also shut down their entire land
border with Qatar, effectively
transforming the country into an island
state. And then, to make Qatar's
isolation even more permanent, the
Saudis even proposed digging a canal
across their entire land border and
filling it in with water from the
Persian Gulf, which would have literally
transformed Qatar into an island. They
made several demands of Qatar in order
to lift the blockade, including that
they shut down Al Jazeera, reduce their
diplomatic relations with Iran, end
their alleged support for foreign
organizations considered to be terrorist
by the Saudis like the Muslim
Brotherhood in Egypt and Hamas in Gaza,
among others, agree to reparation
payments and 10 years of monitoring, and
to align themselves fully with the
geopolitical interests of Saudi Arabia
and the other Gulf states. Naturally,
Qatar refused all of the demands and the
economic consequences of the Saudi-led
blockade over them immediately became
apparent. Qatar Airways had relied
extensively on both Saudi and Emirati
airspace for a significant amount of
their routes and nearly overnight, they
had to suddenly change all of their
flight paths to longer and more costly
routes to avoid both countries entirely.
The Saudi-led blockade over Qatar would
go on for another three and a half years
until January of 2021 and it largely
only ended out of the Saudi regime's own
desire to rebrand their image with the
incoming Biden administration over in
the United States. Many figures in
Washington have been frustrated with the
blockade for years because both Saudi
Arabia and Qatar are nominally strategic
allies of the United States. And even
more strange, the United States, Qatar,
and the Saudis had all actually been
cooperating together alongside of each
other for years in another major
conflict in the region, the civil war in
Yemen. In late 2014 or early 2015, a
Shia Muslim-adjacent group called the
Houthis managed to seize control over
the capital in Yemen and declared
themselves as the sole legitimate
government of the country, sparking a
civil [music] war between themselves and
the previously Sunni Muslim-led
government. The sudden possibility of
Yemen flipping into a Shia-led country
immediately sent shockwaves throughout
the Islamic world and especially in
Saudi Arabia over the fear that a
Shia-led Yemen could end up aligning
itself with the Iranians, the world's
most preeminent Shia power. Were this
scenario to take place, Saudi Arabia
would be placed into its worst
imaginable geopolitical position with
its primary enemy Iran being
theoretically capable of blockading the
Strait of Hormuz, the leads between the
Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea, and an
Iranian-aligned Yemen theoretically
capable of simultaneously blockading the
Bab el-Mandeb Strait between the Red Sea
and the Arabian Sea. Were that to
happen, Saudi Arabia would economically
collapse because the country relies so
extensively on selling their oil exports
to countries in Asia on the backs of
tanker ships. The most direct route to
Asia for these tanker ships to take from
Saudi Arabia are, of course, from either
the Saudi East or West Coast through
either the Strait of Hormuz or the Bab
el-Mandeb Strait. But if both of them
are blockaded, then the only possible
way that Saudi oil could actually
continue reaching their Asian customers
would be through the Suez Canal and
around the entirety of the African
continent, which would make Saudi oil
far more expensive and less competitive
and potentially crash their economy in
the process. So, in order to prevent
that from ever happening, the Saudis
gather together a massive military
coalition that included the Qataris and
support from the Americans, and they
began invading and blockading Yemen in
March of 2015 in order to topple the
Houthis from power.
Djibouti is a small country in the Horn
of Africa that is most well known in the
Western world for its funny sounding
name in English. Indeed, Djibouti is a
country that few Westerners probably
ever give a second thought about. It's
only about the size of New Hampshire and
it only has a small population of about
957,000 people, the lowest population of
any country on the entire mainland
African continent. And yet, despite its
small size and funny sounding name,
Djibouti is one of the most serious and
influential geopolitical hotspots in the
entire world because of this. The sheer
number of foreign military bases that
have been established on its territory.
I mean, just look at this map of the
area immediately around Djibouti's
capital city, which is also called
Djibouti. You've got an American
military base here, which is the only
permanent military base the United
States has got anywhere on the African
continent. You've got a collection of
French military bases up here, a French
operated airbase down here that the
United States also uses to fly drones
out of. You've got a Japanese military
base over here, which is literally the
only overseas base that the Japanese
operate anywhere. You've got an Italian
military base wedged in here by the
Americans. You've got another French
naval base up here. You've got German
and Spanish soldiers who don't have
bases of their own but get stationed up
in these hotels. And then you've even
got a Chinese People's Liberation Army
naval base over here on the other side
of town, opposite of the Americans and
friends. The first overseas military
base that the People's Republic of China
ever built anywhere. And other countries
are still actively trying to build their
own bases here as well. In 2021,
Djibouti agreed to allow Saudi Arabia to
begin construction of a new military
base in the country as well, which will
likely appear somewhere near the
American base when completed. And then
for years now, Djibouti has also been
courted by the Indian and Russian
governments to construct some kind of
base there for themselves as well. All
of this means that as of 2023, little
Djibouti in fact has by far the highest
per capita concentration of foreign
military bases on its soil out of any
country in the world. [music] And that
kind of begs the question, why and how
did this little country in the Horn of
Africa essentially become the 21st
century's global military base for all
of the world's great powers to set up
their operations in. Well, a lot of
Djibouti's significance and value comes
from its ideal geographic position. You
see, while Djibouti is indeed small, it
also sits precisely on the western side
of the narrow Bab el-Mandeb Strait,
immediately opposite of Yemen. At its
narrowest point, this strait is but 28
km wide, and it is those 28 km that all
ships must pass through in order to get
between the Red Sea and the Gulf of
Aden. And in effect, because of the Suez
Canal further to the north through
Egypt, it is these 28 km that all ships
must pass through in order to get
between the Mediterranean Sea and the
Indian Ocean, at least quickly. This
makes the Bab el-Mandeb Strait one of
the most geopolitically crucial maritime
choke points in the world, especially
from the perspective of the global oil
and gas industry and the state security
of dozens of countries from all around
the world. You see, while the Red Sea in
the area around the Bab el-Mandeb Strait
never yielded very many lucrative oil or
natural gas discoveries, the nearby
Persian Gulf region on the other side of
the Arabian Peninsula literally contains
the highest concentration of oil and gas
found anywhere on the planet.
Approximately half of all the world's
known oil reserves and around a third of
all the world's current oil production,
in addition to around 40% of all the
world's known natural gas reserves are
found only here, scattered around the
shores of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi
Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab
Emirates, and Oman. These reserves
include the largest single oil field
ever discovered in the world here at
Ghawar in Saudi Arabia, and the largest
single natural gas field ever discovered
in the world here at the North and South
Pars Field in the center of the Gulf
shared between Qatar and Iran, which all
in itself represents around a fifth of
all the natural gas reserves ever found
on the entire planet. The Persian Gulf
is therefore arguably the single most
important location on the entire planet
in the 21st century, as it is
effectively the greatest single source
in the universe for the energy that
humanity collectively consumes. The
eight countries around the Persian Gulf
harvest their oil and natural gas
resources, load them up on a container
ships, and then ship them through the
similarly narrow Strait of Hormuz and
into the Indian Ocean, where they then
travel onwards to markets all around the
world. For the ships carrying Persian
Gulf oil and natural gas towards Asia,
the journey then takes them across the
Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal, then
through the narrow Strait of Malacca,
and then onwards to the energy-hungry
economies of China, Taiwan, South Korea,
and Japan. But for the ships carrying
Persian Gulf oil and natural gas onwards
from the Strait of Hormuz to Europe, the
quickest and most efficient path is for
them to then head west across the Gulf
of Aden, through the Bab el-Mandeb
Strait past Djibouti, up the Red Sea and
through the Suez Canal across Egypt and
into the Mediterranean before then
continuing onwards to ports across the
European continent. As of 2022,
approximately 20% of the European
Union's oil imports and 24% of their
liquefied natural gas imports were all
coming in from countries around the
Persian Gulf, delivered almost entirely
by containers passing through the Bab
el-Mandeb Strait and the Suez Canal.
Were either of these choke points to
become somehow obstructed or blockaded,
the European Union would in a flash lose
a major import route for huge volumes of
their oil and gas supply that powers
their societies and economies. And the
only possible alternative route for
Persian Gulf oil and gas to reach the
European market would be by then sailing
the very long way around the entirety of
the African continent, a route that adds
weeks to delivery times and consequently
adds higher cost to the prices of
imports. This risk was most laid bare
back in March of 2021, when a container
ship ran aground within the Suez Canal
and blocked it all off to trade for a
period of 6 days, resulting in hundreds
of ships queuing up to pass through the
canal to collectively prevented an
estimated 9.6 [music] billion dollars
worth of trade from taking place. Were
the Bab el-Mandeb Strait to become
blocked for whatever reason instead, the
result would largely be the same. And
that is a massive fear to Saudi Arabia.
You see, if there were ever a textbook
definition of what a petrostate looks
like, it is Saudi Arabia. The country
controls 15% of the entire world's
proven reserves of oil, largely around
its territory bordering the Persian
Gulf. The Saudis are the largest oil
exporter in the entire world, and they
also maintain the largest oil production
capacity in the entire world. The Saudi
state is defined by its vast oil
reserves and production and ability to
sell and export that oil to markets
around the world. 40% of the entire
Saudi GDP is simply the country's oil
industry, while on average over the past
decade, Saudi oil revenues have provided
a whopping 75%
of the government's entire annual budget
that funds everything from ambitious
construction and infrastructure projects
to the Saudi Armed Forces. Therefore, if
Saudi Arabia's ability to export oil
abroad and earn revenue to fund their
government was ever put into jeopardy,
it could end up literally meaning the
collapse of the central Saudi state and
even the Saudi absolute monarchy. Since
nearly all of Saudi Arabia's oil fields
are located in the east of the country
near to the Persian Gulf, the easiest
and most obvious method of getting their
oil out to global markets is by putting
them on container ships and sending them
through the Strait of Hormuz. But that
strait is vulnerable because at its
narrowest point, it is less than 34 km
wide, and the entire northern shoreline
of the strait is controlled by their
greatest geopolitical rival, the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Throughout the
decades, the Iranians have frequently
threatened and boasted about their
ability to shut down the Strait of
Hormuz if they ever felt like it, either
by placing countless naval mines across
the strait and/or by lining the north
shore of the strait with area denial
weapons like surface-to-ship and
surface-to-air missiles and just
attacking everything that comes through
it. Such an action would probably
trigger a military response from the
United States, but it would also, at
least [music] temporarily, crash Saudi
Arabia's ability to export oil through
the Strait of Hormuz and keep their
government functioning. So, in order to
mitigate that risk a bit, the Saudis
constructed what's known as the
East-West Pipeline, which can transfer
limited volumes of their crude oil from
their fields around the Persian Gulf to
ports over on the Red Sea, where the oil
can then continue on to world markets
through either the Bab el-Mandeb Strait
in the south or the Suez Canal in the
north. But unfortunately for the Saudis,
even this ability has come under threat
because of the civil war in Yemen.
Beginning in 2014, a generally Shia
Muslim-adjacent faction in Yemen known
as the Houthis rose up in revolt against
the predominantly Sunni Muslim and
Saudi-backed government in the country,
and they quickly seized control over the
capital city. The Houthis have allegedly
received weapons and financing from the
Iranians, and their zone of control
primarily exists near to the eastern
shore of the Bab el-Mandeb Strait. Were
the Houthis to become successful and
take control over Yemen and remain
aligned with Saudi Arabia's greatest
geopolitical rival, Iran, it is
conceivable that the Houthis and
Iranians could coordinate a joint
blockade action wherein the Iranians
block the Strait of Hormuz and the
Houthis block the Bab el-Mandeb Strait
at the exact same time. And in doing so,
deny the Saudis pretty much any way to
continue exporting their oil to their
largest customers in East Asia, like
China. The only way the Saudis could
continue transporting their oil to
markets in Asia under this scenario
would be the very, very long and limited
way across the East-West Pipeline to the
west coast, up the Red Sea, through the
Suez Canal, across the Mediterranean,
and through the Strait of Gibraltar, and
then around the entirety of the African
continent just to get to the same place
where Saudi oil exports normally begin
at anyway. This is why the Saudis have
been attacking and bombing the Houthis
in Yemen for years now, and it's why the
Saudis have been so interested in
building their own overseas military
base on the opposite end of the Bab el
Mandeb Strait in Djibouti so that they
can quickly respond to the situation and
free the strait up if that time ever
comes. But of course, the Bab el Mandeb
Strait isn't just of critical importance
to the Saudis and their state security.
Following the Russian invasion of
Ukraine in Europe, the European Union
has been steadily divesting itself away
from their previously high imports of
Russian oil and gas. One of the primary
countries that has stepped up to supply
the Europeans with greater quantities of
natural gas is Qatar, a small country
but with big resources. The second
largest reserves of natural gas of any
country on the planet after the Russians
themselves. The Qataris are currently
investing tens of billions of dollars
into expanding their LNG production out
of their North Field in the Gulf, a
large amount of which is slated to be
exported further to Europe as the
European demand for alternative supplies
of gas away from Russia continues to
increase. Qatar is thus becoming a major
component of the European Union's new
energy profile as the EU continues to
increase their LNG imports and divest
themselves away from Russian natural gas
pipelines. But just like the oil making
its way to Europe, the cheapest,
quickest, and easiest way for Qatari LNG
to make its way to Europe is also
through the Strait of Hormuz, the Bab el
Mandeb Strait, and the Suez Canal.
Consequently, the Bab el Mandeb and the
Suez Canal alike are both gaining in
global importance. [music]
Even as far back as 2018 before all
these major geopolitical shifts, an
estimated 6.2 million barrels worth of
crude oil a day were passing through the
Bab el Mandeb Strait toward Europe,
Asia, and North America, representing
around 9% of all the traded oil in the
world. And it's not just oil and gas
that makes the Bab el Mandeb so
important either. From China's
perspective, the strait is a critical
component making up their shortest
maritime export route to Europe as well.
China's economy is basically based
around importing enormous amounts of raw
energy materials from the Persian Gulf
states, using those enormous raw energy
materials to produce enormous volumes of
manufactured goods, and then exporting
those enormous volumes of manufactured
goods to the world's largest consumer
markets in North America and Europe.
These manufactured exports represent
around 30% of the entire Chinese
economy, and the quickest and cheapest
way for their exports to make it to the
European market ends up passing through
the Bab el Mandeb Strait and the Suez
Canal rather than sailing the long way
around either Africa or the Pacific.
Ultimately, the Bab el Mandeb Strait is
one of the most critical maritime
chokepoints that keeps the pace of
globalized trade alive and well. Europe
needs the strait to be secure to
continue importing large amounts of
their oil and gas from the Persian Gulf
and large volumes of manufactured
products from China as cheaply and as
quickly as possible. Persian Gulf states
and primarily Saudi Arabia need the
strait to remain secure so that they can
continue selling oil and gas to Europe
and Asia and keep their foreign policy
options flexible. China needs the strait
secure to continue exporting their
manufactured goods to Europe as quickly
and cheaply as possible. While the
United States wants the strait to remain
secure to keep global trade from falling
apart and to keep the European oil and
gas supply steady in the face of Russian
aggression and energy warfare in Europe.
That's why the security of the Bab
Strait is so important to so many
people. But it's also unfortunately
placed in a very geopolitically
turbulent neighborhood. Yemen, which
occupies the entire north shore of the
strait, has been consumed by one of the
most devastating civil wars of the 21st
century for nearly a decade now that is
still continuing. A civil war that has
claimed the lives of hundreds of
thousands of people and has become an
intense proxy conflict between Saudi
Arabia and Iran as each vies for
supremacy over the other in the country.
On the southern shore of the strait is
Eritrea, a ruthless totalitarian
one-party dictatorship that has been
ruled by the same man ever since 1993
and which is generally considered to
have one of the most abysmal human
rights records and freedoms on the
planet, genuinely on a par with North
Korea. Eritrea was also locked in a
conflict over disputed lands with
neighboring Ethiopia for decades until
it was resolved only in 2019. But the
very next year after that, the Tigray
War exploded in Ethiopia just across the
border as the Tigray region of Ethiopia
rebelled against the central Ethiopian
government. A horrible conflict which
would ultimately between 2020 and 2022
descend into the bloodiest and most
violent conflict of the entire 21st
century and claim the lives of around
600,000
people. The Eritrean army invaded the
Tigray region at the behest of the
central Ethiopian government and
committed numerous atrocities and
massacres. And still, as of the
production of this video, has never
agreed to any formal peace settlement.
And then there's also Somalia, a country
whose very name is essentially
synonymous in the Western world with
anarchy and chaos. The country has been
locked in a multi-sided civil war for
more than 40 years now. There is really
no concept of a centralized authority
anywhere across the country. Over the
decades
and lack of central authority in
Somalia, insurgents and pirates alike
have thrived as they realized their
country enjoys a coastline directly
adjacent to one of the most
strategically valuable and lucrative
maritime trade routes in the world. And
so, Somali pirate attacks on container
and cargo vessels transiting the Bab el
Mandeb Strait have been frequent
occurrences over the past 20 years.
Yemen, Eritrea, and Somalia are all
generally unstable and fragile countries
who've been frequently involved in both
internal and external conflicts. And all
of that combines to put maritime
shipping through the Bab Strait into
jeopardy, which threatens the economies
and security of countries from all
around the world. This then led to the
sense in many countries that a military
presence of some kind nearby to the
strait was necessary in order to ensure
the strait's security and the continued
uninterrupted global flow of cheap oil,
cheap gas, and cheap manufactured goods
through it could continue. And so, for
the most part, that left only little
Djibouti as an island of relative
stability in a very chaotic neighborhood
for outside powers to construct their
military bases in. Bases which would
enable their military to project power
into the Bab el Mandeb Strait and keep
the flow of global trade continuing
through the dangerous neighborhood and
the various risks. But Djibouti itself
is also a fairly autocratic country
since it has been ruled by the very same
president ever since 1999, Omar Guelleh,
and elections are generally viewed as
being unfair and undemocratic. But that
doesn't really matter because crucially,
ignoring some fairly minor border
skirmishes with Eritrea back in 1999 and
2008, Djibouti is a country that has
remained relatively free of conflicts in
a region of the world that is usually
full of them. And part of the reason why
is because recognizing their status as a
small and largely defenseless country in
control of extremely strategically
valuable real estate, President Guelleh
has welcomed the presence of foreign
military to come and establish their
bases within his country that will
protect it from the chaos that surrounds
it. And Djibouti's strategic location is
important even beyond the shipping
concerns through the Bab el Mandeb
Strait. This is because Ethiopia
immediately to the southwest of Djibouti
is home to Africa's second largest
population of more than 120 million
people but is also completely
landlocked, which severely limits their
ability to send exports or receive
imports to and from the rest of the
world. So, because Ethiopia and Eritrea
have been locked in some kind of
territorial conflict for decades had a
very tense relationship, and because
Somalia is, well, Somalia, that
basically just leaves Djibouti as the
only possible nearby source with
maritime access for Ethiopia to receive
imports or send exports through. That is
why little Djibouti, a nation of less
than 1 million people, handles more than
95%
of all the imports from around the world
that make their way into giant Ethiopia,
a nation with more than 120 times their
own population. Djibouti's location and
relative stability within its dangerous
neighborhood grants it outrageously
outsized power and influence over
Ethiopia and the globalized trade
network, which makes it a potentially
lucrative target to many outside powers,
[music] which is why the country has
been more than happy to allow military
great powers from all around the world
to set up their bases there and dissuade
any potential hostile outside power from
ever trying anything funny. And that is
why all today you have American, French,
Italian, Japanese, German, Spanish,
Saudi Arabian, and Chinese military
bases all crowded together so nearby to
each other in attempts from the Russians
and Indians to build their own as well,
all of whom want to project power into
the Bab el Mandeb Strait and protect
their own interests in the region. The
American base in Djibouti is the only
permanent US military base on the
mainland African continent, and it
enables the US military and their drones
to conduct operations in nearby Yemen
against Al-Qaeda elements and in nearby
Somalia against Al-Shabaab and ISIS
elements with support from the French,
Japanese, Italians, Germans, and
Spaniards. The American base has also
helped with refueling Saudi warplanes as
they bomb Houthi targets across Yemen.
While Saudi Arabia's own future base in
Djibouti will help them do this
themselves after the Biden
administration in the United States
withdrew all of their direct American
support for the Saudi war effort in
Yemen back in 2021, like helping them
refueling their aircraft. And then the
Chinese naval bases there officially
help fight against piracy in the region
and ensure that critical maritime
shipping lanes remain open and secure.
Though it has generated a fairly high
degree of geopolitical angst with the
American military base that is only a
few miles away from it. Both the
Americans and the Chinese have lodged
official complaints with the Djiboutian
government accusing the other of using
their base to spy on their own base
[music] with one incident even being
reported by the Americans of Chinese
troops in their base on the north side
of town shining laser beams into the
cockpits of American planes flying
nearby. But nonetheless, Djibouti allows
them both to remain along with all of
the other military bases in the country
as well because they all serve
Djibouti's own purposes. Who would dare
attack little defenseless Djibouti and
provoke both of the emerging global
superpowers, the United States and
China? Djibouti's strategic calculus
here is really nothing short of a genius
play and the best possible use of the
geographic hand that they have been
dealt.
Perhaps more than any other country
today in the 21st century, Saudi Arabia
has the most uncertain future ahead of
itself. The country truly has almost
countless problems ahead of it that it
must overcome in order to survive and
they've only been able to overcome all
of these problems so far because of
their dominance over a critical resource
that everyone in the world has wanted
for the past 100 years, but from which
the world is currently starting to move
away from, oil. The Saudi Arabian state
is one that is nearly utterly defined by
its control over this black liquidy
resource. As recently as 2018, the
petroleum business in the country
accounted for a whopping 87% of the
government's annual budget, 90% of the
country's export earnings and a massive
42%
of the country's entire GDP. This is
because Saudi Arabia is known today to
control approximately a quarter of all
the proven oil reserves in the world,
the second largest reserves of all the
world's countries, second only to
Venezuela. But unlike Venezuela's
technically larger oil reserves, which
are highly crude, difficult and
expensive to access, Saudi Arabia's only
slightly smaller reserves are located
under pressure just beneath the earth's
surface and they are extremely easy and
cheap to access and they're much easier
to refine. This is why for decades Saudi
Arabia was the largest producer of oil
in the world and is currently the
world's second largest producer just
barely behind the United States.
Alongside Russia, these three countries
are collectively referred to as the big
three of global oil production today
because no single other country comes
anywhere close to matching them and they
combined produce approximately 40% of
all the oil in the world. But America's
population is 332 million and so most of
America's oil production is consumed
within the country and not exported
abroad, which is why America is only the
world's 14th largest oil exporter. Saudi
Arabia has just about a tenth of the
American population, but produces nearly
as much oil as it, meaning that they
simply have far more that they can never
possibly consume on their own and so
they have far more left over to export
to other countries. Saudi Arabia is thus
by far the largest exporter of oil in
the world and oil continues to provide
roughly a third of all the energy that
humanity collectively consumes
worldwide. Countries like India, China,
Japan, South Africa and numerous
European states all import enormous
volumes of their own oil supplies from
Saudi Arabia and are thus all heavily
reliant on keeping those flows of oil
continuing for now. It is this simple
calculus that has given Saudi Arabia
enormous geopolitical power and clout
over the past century because they've
just got more oil to give others than
anybody else and more than any other
country, Saudi Arabia is the one most
capable of influencing the global price
of oil either negatively or positively.
This is because besides being by far the
largest exporter of oil, Saudi Arabia
also has by far the largest spare
capacity of oil production and this is
what truly gives the Saudi state its
unbelievable levels of global power.
Spare capacity in the oil business
refers to the number of oil wells that a
country possesses that are not currently
being used, but which can be brought
online again in a very short notice to
rapidly increase production. Saudi
Arabia wields the largest spare capacity
of oil production in the world and they
usually keep around 1 and 1/2 to 2
million barrels per day of oil
production reserved in this spare
capacity. By rapidly turning this spare
capacity back online, Saudi Arabia can
rapidly increase its globally
significant oil production and dump
those extra supplies onto the world
market, thus decreasing global prices of
oil. And by doing the reverse, by
shutting more wells offline and
increasing its available spare capacity,
Saudi Arabia can rapidly decrease its
globally significant oil production and
restrict global oil supplies, thus
increasing worldwide oil scarcity and
increasing global oil prices. This is
why Saudi Arabia is often referred to as
the central bank of world oil and it's
how the Saudi state can exert
significant leverage over every single
country in the world, including the
world's most powerful country, the
United States. Well, America only
imports a fraction of its oil supply
from Saudi Arabia these days, overall
oil prices in the United States can
still be severely impacted by the whims
of the absolute monarchy in Saudi
Arabia. After the Russians invaded
Ukraine in February of 2022, the Western
world immediately passed a series of
sanctions against Russia that shut that
country's oil supply out of their
markets, which obviously reduced the
supply of oil in their markets and led
to a rise in oil prices. And when oil
prices rise, it tends to increase
inflation in every other sector of the
economy because nearly every business in
the world relies on oil at some point in
time in its production process, which
means that when oil prices go up,
businesses have to raise their prices in
order to offset their increased
production costs. So, after the Russians
invaded Ukraine and the global price of
oil shot up and inflation rates went up
along with it, the Biden administration
in the United States requested that
Saudi Arabia turn more of their spare
capacity on and ramp up production to
place more oil onto the global market in
order to decrease oil prices that would
help tame global inflation. But the
Saudis instead did the complete
opposite. They ended up cutting more of
their production over and over these
past several months, adding more wells
to their offline spare capacity and
decreasing the supply of global oil in
coordination with Russia, which is
increasing oil prices around the world,
which is enabling the Russians to earn
more money on their own oil sales that
is being plowed into waging their war in
Ukraine and it is increasing
inflationary pressures in gasoline
prices in the United States. [music] As
of May 2023, the American Strategic
Petroleum Reserve or SPR, the usually
massive emergency stockpile of petroleum
that the United States keeps stashed
away in tanks in Louisiana and Texas to
release during an oil supply crisis, has
been gradually depleted every single day
since the invasion of Ukraine began to
the lowest level seen in 40 years right
now since 1983. Doing so has helped tame
gasoline prices in the country for now,
but with the reserve now heavily
depleted Washington possesses very
little other options available to keep
gasoline prices from spiraling upwards
leading up to the November 2024
presidential election other than calling
Saudi Arabia and requesting them to turn
more of their spare capacity back
online, which the Saudis will surely
only do if they are given certain
favors. This is precisely how Saudi
Arabia is able to wield its oil might
and exert geopolitical influence across
the entire world in the process. But
Saudi Arabia's great challenge in the
21st century is that this greatest of
its powers has a finite lifespan
remaining and at a certain point in the
future, a day will come when this power
will completely evaporate altogether
because over the next several decades as
countries around the world steadily
continue moving their economies away
from oil as an energy source, Saudi
Arabia's great advantage of being the
global oil business's central bank will
matter less and less. And if the country
does nothing to change itself between
now and whenever that uncertain future
day arrives it will only be left with
sand, one of the worst human rights
records on the planet, an archaic
religious absolute monarchy that most of
the outside world finds repugnant and a
lack of protection from the United
States while being surrounded by
countless enemies from both within and
without. [music]
If Saudi Arabia does nothing to change,
Saudi Arabia will no longer exist at all
by the end of the century. But change is
also going to be very, very hard and
uncertain. And if you want to understand
Arabia is going in the future, you've
got to understand where Saudi Arabia
came from in the first place and why the
country would have almost certainly
never managed to exist at all in its
current form were it not for the very
fortunate discovery of oil very early on
into its history. For thousands of
years, the Arabian Peninsula was divided
between various different tribes,
sheikhs, kings and empires. There was
very little to note about the lands in
the center of the Arabian Peninsula
where the House of Saud first originated
in history a little more than 300 years
ago in a region known as the Najd. The
overwhelming majority of Saudi Arabia's
current lands are completely
uninhabitable. The country is after all
the largest in the world today that
doesn't have a single river anywhere to
be found within it. Rainfall across most
of the country's land is extremely
scarce and so fresh water for drinking
and agriculture have historically been
extremely difficult to come by. Across
the south of the modern country is a
vast desert known as the Rub' al Khali,
better known in English as the Empty
Quarter. It is the largest continuous
expanse of sand that can be found
anywhere in the world. It is nearly
completely devoid of life and it is
larger in area than the entirety of
France. The region of Najd deep within
the interior of the Arabian Peninsula
was an extremely sparsely populated and
isolated backwater separated from the
rest of the world by vast empty deserts
and high mountains with nothing of value
to offer anyone in the outside world. It
was a place hardly anyone paid any
attention to and its extreme isolation
from the rest of the world was partially
why an extremely strict interpretation
of Sunni Islam gradually developed
there, now sometimes known as Wahhabism.
It was an unlikely place from which one
of the most powerful nations of the
modern world would arise from, but so it
did regardless. Across the 18th and 19th
centuries, two small and largely unknown
family clans within the Najd region
cemented an alliance between themselves,
the House of Saud who had run the
politics and day-to-day governance of
the lands they controlled and the clan
of Wahhab who had run the lands'
religious affairs based upon their own
extremely strict interpretation of Sunni
Islam. The previously mentioned branch
of the faith that is sometimes referred
to as Wahhabism. After joining forces,
the Saud and Wahhab alliance went on to
carve out the first Saudi state that
survived between 1744 and 1814 before it
was ultimately destroyed by the
Ottomans. A group of survivors managed
to take back the Saud's ancestral
capital at Riyadh in 1818 and from there
they carved out the second Saudi state
that survived for most of the rest of
the 19th century until 1891 when
catastrophic infighting among the royal
family and conflict with a rival family
clan known as the Rashidis led to the
state's ultimate collapse. The surviving
Saud family members were forced to flee
from Riyadh as exiles into nearby Kuwait
where they were powerless without any
lands and without any wealth. But with a
very good historical claim to the
supposedly worthless lands of Najd in
the interior of Arabia. There and then
the Saud family probably would have
vanished into irrelevance never to be
seen or heard from again were it not for
the ambitions of a young man of the
family ultimately become known as Ibn
Saud, the man who would create the
modern-day kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Determined to restore his family's
position of power, a 27-year-old Ibn
Saud in 1902 led a party of a couple
dozen loyal men from Kuwait to recapture
his family's ancestral seat in Riyadh
from the rival Rashidi clan. It was the
beginning of a decades-long campaign of
conquest waged across Arabia for the
young man. But at first very few people
from the outside world paid any
attention to it. The lands that now
constitute Saudi Arabia back then in the
early 20th century may have only been
home to as few as 2 million people who
were almost entirely very poor
desert-roaming nomads. And so the
squabbling between two rival clans in
these lands was hardly noticed by any of
the great powers of the day. But things
began shifting during World War I. The
Rashidi clan was allied to the Ottoman
Empire and after the war broke out the
British began supplying weapons and cash
to Ibn Saud who was fighting against
them. That combined with Ibn Saud's own
alliance to the ultra Sunni Wahhabi clan
provided tens of thousands of fanatical
and now well-armed troops proved
decisive. By the early 1920s the Najd
region of Arabia had been entirely
conquered. But the campaigns weren't
quite finished yet. After World War I's
conclusion and the collapse of the
Ottoman Empire in the Middle East, the
British appointed the Arab Hashemite
family as the new reigning monarchs in
three newly created kingdoms: Iraq,
Jordan, and the Hejaz which crucially
included the two holiest cities in
Islam, Mecca and Medina. But relations
between the British and the Hashemite
family quickly soured after the war's
conclusion. After the British
transformed Jordan and Iraq into
colonial mandates and began letting Jews
settle in Palestine. The Hashemites
ruling the kingdom of Hejaz refused to
ratify the 1919 Treaty of Versailles.
And so the British withdrew their
support for the family and backed up
their other Arab wartime ally, Ibn Saud
and his expanding kingdom in the Najd.
Emboldened, Ibn Saud launched a new
military campaign by invading the
kingdom of Hejaz in 1924 which was fully
conquered within only a single year. By
1925 the modern territory of Saudi
Arabia was fully under the control of
Ibn Saud after more than 20 years worth
of nearly constant warfare including the
holy cities of Mecca and Medina. A few
years later on in 1932 Ibn Saud
proclaimed the creation of a brand new
kingdom over all of these lands and he
named it after himself and his family,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with himself
naturally as the new kingdom's absolute
monarch. The third Saudi state had been
born covering a large amount of the
lands that the previous two Saudi states
from the 19th and 18th centuries had
also encompassed. The very basis of Ibn
Saud's argument and later the Saudi
state's argument right up into the 2020s
today that he was merely restoring his
own family's historical territorial
claims. But his new kingdom entered into
a life in 1932 as a severely troubled
one. The kingdom had been created
through decades worth of violent warfare
and conquest and many of the lands Ibn
Saud now controlled were forcefully
conquered and included many people who
found his alliance with the extremely
orthodox Wahhabists as off-putting. Shia
Muslim minority populations were found
in the eastern province near the Red Sea
and in the south near Yemen who often
felt religiously persecuted by the Sunni
fundamentalist Wahhabi-aligned regime.
And even less strict fellow Sunni
Muslims in the now conquered kingdom of
Hejaz felt on edge. Moreover, the exiled
and furious Hashemite family continued
to rule kingdoms in neighboring Jordan
and Iraq with very good claims to the
Hejaz region. Internal instability
within the new kingdom was rife and to
try and preserve the peace Ibn Saud
married a daughter of every one of the
other tribes he had conquered, 20 wives
in all who would go on to produce more
than a hundred children for him
including 45 sons, six of whom would go
on to later rule the kingdom after his
death including the current 87-year-old
king today in 2023 who was born when Ibn
Saud was 60. And after decades of
warfare the new kingdom's finances were
in a pretty terrible state with nothing
but a tiny tax base of 2 million
impoverished people. The only actually
important thing that Ibn Saud's new
kingdom controlled to earn money from
was its control over the holy cities of
Mecca and Medina which only brought in
modest amounts of religious tourism to
the state's struggling coffers. At this
point in time it was far more likely
that either Egypt or Iraq with their
plentiful agricultural farmland around
the Nile and Tigris-Euphrates rivers
would emerge as the dominant source of
the Arab world's geopolitical power in
the 20th century just as they had both
been for literally all of human history
beforehand. But of course the discovery
of oil suddenly changed everything. You
see oil had been discovered previously
in commercial quantities in nearby Iran,
Iraq, and Bahrain. And Ibn Saud had
convinced himself that there was still
oil to be discovered within his kingdom
nearby as well. But it was the British
who had discovered oil in Iran, Iraq,
and Bahrain. And Ibn Saud didn't exactly
trust the imperialist and colonial
tendencies of them. So instead Ibn Saud
went to the Americans to get them
searching for oil in his kingdom. In
1933, the year after his kingdom was
proclaimed, Standard Oil Company of
California or Socal, later known as
Chevron, was granted the exclusive
contract to begin the search. It was
only five years later in 1938 when they
made the first discovery of oil in Saudi
Arabia at a well known as Dammam number
seven right by the Persian Gulf.
Initially Socal created a wholly-owned
subsidiary assigned to the oil they
discovered in Saudi Arabia that would
eventually be named Arabian Oil Company,
aka Aramco. After Saudi Arabia managed
to take full control over the subsidiary
company itself later on it became simply
known as Saudi Aramco, the modern
state-owned Saudi oil giant. From 1938
onwards more and more oil fields were
steadily discovered across Saudi
Arabia's sparsely populated eastern
province and production steadily
increased up to the point where the
country was the 22nd largest producer of
oil in the world significant enough to
begin attracting the attention of the
American government during World War II.
Oil was becoming more important than
ever before during that war and the
American president of the time Franklin
Delano Roosevelt knew that America and
the post-war Washington-led alliance
structure needed as much oil as they
could possibly get to compete with the
Soviet bloc in the war's aftermath. Ibn
Saud was a man who still had many
enemies with the British-backed
Hashemites still in power in Iraq and
Jordan and many Saudis within the
country who didn't like his and the
Wahhabists' absolute rule. And so it
eventually became time for him and FDR
to finally meet. They did so upon a ship
in the Suez Canal in February of 1945
mere weeks before FDR's own death. And
their agreement became the basis for the
Saudi-American relationship that has
largely endured ever since. The United
States, despite being a secular
constitutional republic, would back the
ultra Islamic absolute monarchy of Saudi
Arabia because both had something the
other desperately wanted. America wanted
access to the increasingly important
Saudi oil fields both for itself and for
its allies all around the world. While
the Saudis wanted America's security
because as a sparsely populated country
with nothing of value whatsoever besides
for oil they knew they could never hope
to defend themselves or their oil on
their own either against their own
people or their external rivals. But who
would ever dare to attack them if they
had the backing of the most powerful
country in the world? Over time this
basic arrangement between America and
Saudi Arabia, security guarantees in
exchange for oil, has continually
evolved but remained more or less the
same ever since. Ibn Saud died in 1953
and his sons have ruled the kingdom as
absolute monarchs ever since. Eventually
more oil fields were discovered around
the initial Dammam number seven well
like Safaniya in the Gulf, the largest
offshore oil field ever discovered in
the world, and the mighty Ghawar field,
the largest onshore oil field ever
discovered and the largest single source
of human energy that we as a species
have ever so far discovered. It turned
out that the lands Ibn Saud had
conquered for his kingdom were not so
worthless or useless after all because
they contained within them the most
valuable oil fields that have ever been
discovered on the planet. Money began
flooding into the kingdom as the oil
fields continued to be developed. But
the true era of wealth only came after
the 1973 oil crisis. After Israel
defeated the combined Arab armies of
Egypt and Syria during the Yom Kippur
War, the OPEC oil cartel made up of
major oil producing countries from all
around the world decided to embargo many
of Israel's most major supporters
including the United States. Saudi
Arabia briefly participated in that
embargo and the global price of oil
subsequently quadrupled and remained
high for more than a decade afterwards.
The flood of money into Saudi Arabia
suddenly became a deluge of money over
the following decade and the kingdom
became one of the wealthiest countries
in the world. And the House of Saud
became one of the wealthiest families in
the world. It was with this unbelievable
money that Saudi Arabia made its great
bargain with the people of the kingdom.
The centuries-old alliance between the
House of Saud and the clan of Wahhab
remained intact. Meaning that the Saudi
state was governed by a set of extremely
fundamentalist Sunni Muslim values that
a lot of the state's minority groups,
like the Shia and less fundamentalist
Sunnis, didn't exactly get along with
very well. Which in a vacuum would have
led to domestic instability. But the
enormous revenues that the state was
earning from its oil business enabled
the government to basically just bribe
all of its citizens into complicity. And
so Saudi Arabia essentially became a
massive welfare state for all of its
citizens. Zero taxes were levied on
anything or anyone because oil was
paying for all of the government's
budget. A flood of money went into
subsidizing everything for Saudi
Arabia's citizens from health care,
education, food, water, fuel,
electricity, and whatever else you could
possibly think of. Nearly all of the
citizens' needs were completely being
covered by the government. And in
exchange, it was expected that all of
the citizens would accept some of the
strictest and most totalitarian
religious laws anywhere in the world.
And more importantly, accept the House
of Saud's absolute legitimacy to rule a
medieval kingdom in a 20th century
world. As the 20th century continued
progressing, oil production in the
United States diminished while
production in Saudi Arabia only
increased to the point where the kingdom
even overtook America to become the
world's largest oil producer for
decades. America became increasingly
committed to protecting the kingdom's
strategically important oil supply and
by 1991, as production in the United
States continued to flounder, America
found itself importing nearly a third of
all of its imports from the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. America needed to protect
Saudi Arabia at all costs. But
justifying doing so in Washington was
growing increasingly difficult because
Saudi Arabia was growing even more
totalitarian. As more and more
Westerners came to the country for work
in developing the numerous oil fields,
the country's ultra-orthodox Wahhabi
establishment grew increasingly agitated
at their growing presence. By 1979, it
had just gotten to be too much for some.
And a group of hundreds of armed
religious militants stormed the Grand
Mosque in Mecca and seized control over
it. Denouncing the Saudi king as a
blasphemer for increasingly Westernizing
the country. The Grand Mosque, one of
the holiest sites in all of Islam, thus
became the site of a military siege that
lasted for weeks as Saudi security
forces battled with the militants inside
to regain control. It marked the very
first major direct challenge to the
House of Saud's legitimacy to rule over
the kingdom since its establishment back
in 1932. And the Saudi monarchy chose to
respond to the challenge by further
embracing the Sunni Wahhabi religious
leaders and increasing the severity of
religious laws in the country. All of
the previous social reforms that were
taking place in the country were
reversed. Movie theaters were
universally banned. Women were
completely removed from all of the media
and newspapers altogether. Women's dress
codes were much more strictly enforced
in public. Homosexual activity was much
more punished by the death penalty. And
the Saudi state-sanctioned religious
police increased their patrols on the
streets to rigorously enforce the newly
strengthened religious laws. For the
next 40-odd years, Saudi Arabia would be
among the most theocratic and
totalitarian regimes anywhere on the
planet. As the ruling Saudi royal family
used strict Islamic religious laws to
strengthen their own legitimacy in the
eyes of the ultra-conservatives of the
country. But the trend towards religious
fundamentalism at home would eventually
go on to produce even more problems for
the kingdom in the future and even
jeopardize its relationship with its own
greatest protector and security
guarantor, the United States. It was no
coincidence that Osama bin Laden and
Al-Qaeda were initially both produced
within the ultra-religious environment
of Saudi Arabia. In 1990, when Saddam's
Iraq appeared likely to invade Saudi
Arabia, bin Laden offered the Saudi king
his own mujaheddin fighters who were
battle-hardened during the Afghan war
against the Soviets to resist. But the
king refused and instead decided to
allow the Americans to send hundreds of
thousands of their troops to defend the
kingdom against the invasion instead.
The presence of hundreds of thousands of
Americans within the kingdom granted by
the king, who is supposed to be the
protector of the two Islamic holy
cities, infuriated bin Laden and
Al-Qaeda. And the outrage was never
forgiven. In 1995, bin Laden declared
that the king of Saudi Arabia was a
heretic. And a war between the kingdom
and Al-Qaeda has raged on ever since.
With Al-Qaeda continually seeking ways
to overthrow the monarchy and replace it
with what it sees as its own vision of
restored fundamentalist Sunni theocratic
rule. But the fact that Osama bin Laden
himself was born in Saudi Arabia and
that many of Al-Qaeda's fighters as well
turned out to be Saudi citizens,
including 15 out of the 19 hijackers
responsible for carrying out the 9/11
attacks, has remained a sore spot for
relations between the kingdom and the
United States ever since. But in
addition to the growing Sunni Islamist
threat within the kingdom represented by
the likes of Al-Qaeda who felt that the
Saudi royal family wasn't quite
religious enough, external threats to
the Saudis' rule in the kingdom were
greatly growing in numbers as well. The
emergence of the revolutionary Shia
Islamist regime in neighboring Iran in
1979 presented the Saudi kingdom with
its most major external arch-enemy that
it has been locked in an on-again,
off-again cold war with ever since. The
revolutionary regime in Iran had
overthrown their own absolute monarch
after all and replaced him with a
totalitarian Islamic theocracy ruled by
the country's Shiite clergy and their
supreme leader, the Ayatollah Khamenei.
And they were intent on exporting their
revolution to every other monarchist
regime in the Islamic world and
overthrowing all of their kings as well,
including Saudi Arabia's monarchy and
the other Gulf Arab states. But for a
time, both revolutionary Iran and
absolute monarchist Saudi Arabia found
some common ground in their mutual enemy
in Iraq, Saddam Hussein. Saddam had led
Iraq into a brutal invasion of Iran in
1980. And then in 1990, Saddam invaded
and annexed Kuwait and was preparing the
Iraqi army to invade Saudi Arabia next.
The United States and a massive
coalition involving Saudi Arabian troops
intervened and kicked the Iraqi army out
of Kuwait and liberated the country in
1991. But Saddam still remained in power
and remained as a potential threat to
both the Saudis and the Iranians for the
next decade. Relations between Tehran
and Riyadh were therefore fairly
cordial. But that all suddenly ended in
2003 when the United States invaded Iraq
in the aftermath of the September 11th
attacks and overthrew Saddam and
replaced him with a democratic republic.
A move that Saudi Arabia fiercely
disagreed with Washington over. And part
of why they disagreed with it so
strongly was because they knew that with
Saddam now out of the way, the Iranians
would make moves into exporting their
revolution into Iraq next. Which is
exactly what they began doing. Iraq,
with a majority of its population being
Shia Muslim Arabs and immediately
adjacent to Iran, was one of the most
obvious first targets for the Iranians
to export their revolution into. Quickly
after Saddam was removed by the
Americans, Iranian troops began entering
into the country and building militia
organizations out of the country's large
Shia Muslim population and
indoctrinating them with Iran's
revolutionary anti-monarchist zeal.
Naturally, to try and prevent Iraq from
becoming essentially an
Iranian-controlled puppet, the Saudis
began funding and supplying Iraqi Sunni
Muslim militias to counteract them. And
the first major proxy war between Tehran
and Riyadh had begun. Then in 2011, the
United States mostly withdrew all of
their troops from Iraq. And that very
same year, the Arab Spring revolutions
began sweeping all across the Arab
world. As restless and angry Arab
populations unsatisfied with their
long-time regimes began taking to the
streets for change. Popular revolutions
eventually managed to topple the
long-standing regimes in Tunisia, Libya,
Egypt, and Yemen. While enormous civil
wars exploded in Libya, Yemen, and
Syria. Fearful about the wave of
revolution penetrating into their own
long-standing kingdom and their own
potentially restless population, the
Saudis began massively increasing their
purchases of American-made weapons,
tanks, jets, and ships to keep
themselves in power in a series of deals
worth tens of billions of dollars. But
the confrontation between revolutionary
Iran and monarchist Saudi Arabia quickly
came to a boiling point over the small
island of Bahrain just off of the Saudi
coast. Approximately 60% of the island's
total population are Shia Muslims. But
the ruling monarchy there are Sunni
Muslims. Revolutionary Shia Iran on the
other side of the Gulf further claims
Bahrain as a lost Iranian province based
on their own historical territorial
claims to the island and has repeatedly
pressed the issue and insisted that the
Shia majority on the island are being
repressed by the minority Sunni
monarchy. Back in 1986, Saudi Arabia and
Bahrain finished the construction of the
25 km King Fahd Causeway that connects
the island to the Saudi mainland. It was
ostensibly built to further facilitate
trade and travel between the two
countries. But one cannot help to notice
that it can also be used as a bridge for
Saudi tanks and soldiers to come
storming into the island across were the
island's monarchy ever in jeopardy of
falling during a revolution. Were Iran
to successfully foment a revolution in
the island that would do that and
install a revolutionary Shia government
similar to their own in its place, the
very existence of the Saudi state itself
would be directly put into question. The
island is only located about 60 km away
from Saudi Arabia's largest single oil
field, Ghawar, only about 50 km away
from the headquarters of Saudi Aramco,
the state-owned oil company, and only
about 80 km away from Ras Tanura, which
is the Saudi's largest oil export
terminal, and indeed the largest one in
the world. Moreover, Bahrain is placed
directly off the coast of the Shia
Muslim majority areas of Eastern Saudi
Arabia, where nearly the entirety of
Saudi Arabia's oil reserves and
infrastructure are also located. Meaning
that were the Iranians to successfully
export their revolution into Shia
majority Bahrain and topple the Sunni
monarchy there, the next target would be
the next door Shia majority areas of
Eastern Saudi Arabia, which could put
the entire Saudi oil business into
jeopardy, which could put the entire
Saudi monarchy and state into jeopardy.
And that could never be tolerated. So,
when uprisings began in Bahrain aimed at
toppling the monarchy in 2011, Saudi
troops indeed came storming across the
bridge to help put them down. Saudi
Arabia came to back the rebels seeking
to overthrow Bashar al-Assad's regime in
Syria, because if it worked and he was
removed, it would be Iran who would lose
a core component of their overall grand
strategy. The Assad regime in Syria has
been a core ally of the Iranians for
decades over their mutual opposition to
Israel. And together with an
Iranian-dominated Iraq, they form Iran's
so-called land bridge across the Middle
East towards the Mediterranean Sea,
enabling Iranian militias and proxies to
safely and reliably transport weapons to
Iranian-aligned organizations like
Hezbollah in Lebanon, and across the
Mediterranean Sea to Hamas in the Gaza
Strip. Who all share Iran's desire to
destroy the Israeli state from
existence. It also, from Saudi Arabia's
perspective, makes it appear that Iran
is attempting to encircle them and
overthrow their kingdom. Thus, to
shatter Iran's land bridge and break out
of their potential encirclement, the
Saudis backed up rebel forces in Syria
while Iran backed up the regime. The
proxy war quickly extended into Libya as
well, as the Saudis backed the
Tobruk-based House of Representatives
government against the Iranian-supported
Tripoli-based Government of National
Accord. But the absolute terror in the
royal halls of Riyadh over being
encircled by the revolutionary Iranians
came to a fever pitch in 2014, when the
Shia-adjacent Houthi movement suddenly
managed to conquer the Yemeni capital
and was advancing on the city of Aden
next, the most significant port anywhere
between the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea.
Were the Houthis to completely capture
the entirety of Yemen, it would have
placed a highly militant and probably
revolutionary Shiite Muslim power
closely aligned with the Iranians across
not only more than 1,300 km of their own
Shia Muslim subjects in the south of the
country, but also directly on the
strategic maritime choke point of the
Bab al-Mandab Strait as well. Were that
to happen, Saudi Arabia truly would be
effectively encircled and checkmated,
surrounded by a hostile Iran who wants
nothing more than to topple its
monarchy. And Iran's allies placed into
power in Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon, and
potentially in Bahrain and in Yemen as
well. Iran could hypothetically mine or
blockade the Strait of Hormuz regulating
all the maritime traffic between the
Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean, while
the Houthis could simultaneously use
Iranian-supplied missiles and weapons to
blockade the Bab al-Mandab Strait as
well. Such a scenario would be an utter
doomsday one for the Saudis, because
they would lose the easiest ability to
export all of their oil to their largest
customers in East Asia. The only way
remaining for them to continue exporting
oil at all under that scenario would be
via the Suez Canal through Egypt. But
even that too nearly came under risk.
After the revolution in Egypt toppled
the long-time dictator of that country
in 2011, the Muslim Brotherhood's
candidate came to power in a democratic
election next. The Muslim Brotherhood is
a Sunni Islamist organization that, like
Iran, is also staunchly opposed to the
concept of monarchies in the Islamic
world, including the Saudi monarchy. So,
obviously, the Saudis despise them. Were
a Brotherhood government in Egypt to
hypothetically deny the Saudis access to
the Suez Canal in conjunction with the
Houthis and Iranians shutting down their
access through al-Mandab and Hormuz
Straits, and nobody like the Americans
did anything to stop it, Saudi Arabia
would just completely collapse very
rapidly, because they would lose any
ability to actually export any of their
oil out of the country, and 87% of their
government's budget would just
evaporate, meaning their ability to
bribe all of their divided and repressed
citizenry would end, and their ability
to buy massive amounts of weapons would
end, and their monarchy would just
collapse into dust. And thus, the
Saudi-sponsored military coup in Egypt
that luckily for them panned out and
overthrew the Muslim Brotherhood from
power, replaced it with a much more
friendly military government. But coups
and plots were not work to dislodge the
Houthis from power in Yemen. Instead,
the Saudis initiated a massive military
intervention of their own into the
country with enormous bombing and
missile attacks and a devastating naval
blockade to choke the Houthis into
submission and remove what they
perceived as Iran's revolutionary
influence from the country. Yemen thus
became the focal point for the
Iranian-Saudi rivalry from 2015 onwards.
And the Saudis agreed to buy up tens of
billions of dollars more worth of
additional American weaponry to wage
that war with. Weapons that would help
contribute to what the United Nations
has described as one of the 21st
century's greatest humanitarian
catastrophes. The Saudi Arabian defense
budget exponentially exploded to fight
the war in Yemen, and to fight all of
these other proxy conflicts in Iraq and
Syria and in Libya, because the Saudi
royal family saw external enemies
circling all around them, all being led
and coordinated by the revolutionary
Iranians. And they decided to respond in
the only way they knew how to do, throw
tens of billions of dollars at the
problem they earned from selling their
oil and hope it all went away. Saudi
defense spending grew so high in the mid
to late 2010s that it became roughly on
a par with Russia, and was only
outmatched by the superpowers of China
and the United States. In 2015, Saudi
Arabia was spending $2,748
per person in the country on its
military, while the United States was
only spending $1,975
per person on theirs. But throwing money
at trying to overpower their enemies
wasn't really working. The Iranians only
spent a few tens of millions of their
dollars arming the Houthis in comparison
to the tens of billions that the Saudis
were spending attempting to crush them.
And the war gradually transformed into a
quagmire with the Houthis no closer to
being removed than when the war began.
And after nearly 400,000 deaths in the
country caused by the conflict, Bashar
al-Assad has remained in power in Syria
for over a decade despite the Saudis'
best efforts to remove him, while Iraq
increasingly falls under Iran's
influence as well. And then, in
September of 2019, a series of drone and
cruise missile attacks bombarded Saudi
Arabia's oil refineries at Abqaiq and
Khurais in the Eastern Province,
destroying the kingdom's largest oil
processing and refinery facilities. 5.7
million barrels per day worth of Saudi
oil production were knocked offline in
the kingdom by the attack, representing
what was nothing less than the biggest
disruption ever seen in the entire oil
industry up to that point. The Houthis
down in Yemen quickly claimed
responsibility for the attack as a
reprisal for the Saudi air campaign, but
they were more than 1,200 km away from
the attack's location. American
intelligence later determined that the
attacks probably actually originated to
the north and were probably fired by the
Iranians themselves either from within
Iran itself or from within their Shiite
militia-controlled areas in Iraq. It
could have been interpreted as an act of
war by the kingdom, but the United
States made it clear that they didn't
see things that way and would not
militarily back the kingdom if that's
the route they chose to go down. America
wasn't prepared to go to war with Iran
over the issue, and with their military
already struggling in Yemen, the Saudis
were left with no other choice but to
back down and de-escalate. The oil
processing facilities were quickly
repaired and business went on as usual.
But the Saudis never forgot that America
had just refused to defend them. The
days back when America was willing to
deploy hundreds of thousands of troops
to protect the kingdom and its oil back
in 1991 during the Gulf War appeared in
Riyadh to be over. The development of
shale oil in the United States in the
early 2010s had resulted in a massive
increase in America's own oil
production, and by 2018, the year just
before the Abqaiq attack, America had
finally surpassed Saudi Arabia and
regained its title as the world's
largest producer. America was relying
less and less on Saudi oil for
themselves, and by 2019, only about 7%
of America's oil imports were still even
coming from the kingdom, coming to how
nearly a third of their oil imports were
from Saudi Arabia back in 1991 during
the Gulf War. As Washington began
relying less on the Saudis themselves
for their oil, America's distaste for
Saudi Arabia's totalitarian regime and
human rights practices became more
pronounced as well. An absolute monarchy
in the 21st century with extremely
authoritarian religious laws waging a
brutal war in Yemen with hundreds of
thousands of deaths on its hand, all
fueled by American weapons no less, and
responsible for carrying out
assassinations on journalists would not
be a usual ally of the United States
were it not also for all of its oil. And
all of that oil was becoming less
important to Washington. Moreover, the
world at large is beginning to move more
and more away from oil as an energy
source as nations around the world try
and fight back against global climate
change. The countries of the European
Union, many of whom are currently and
historically some of Saudi Arabia's
largest oil customers, are planning on
completely phasing out their own fossil
fuel usage by 2050. And if they're
successful, none of them will be
customers of the Saudis any longer
within only 27 years from now. Japan
also plans to eliminate oil and gas as
energy sources at some point in the
future this same century, though without
the same strict 2050 timetable as the
Europeans. One of the biggest reasons
why the Americans still sort of support
Saudi Arabia today, even though they
import hardly any of their oil
themselves is because the Saudis still
supply enormous amounts of oil to many
of America's closest allies, like the
NATO states in Europe and the Japanese.
But when this too ends, America will
have almost no reason left to continue
protecting the kingdom, and the deal
established between FDR and Ibn Saud
nearly 80 years ago will finally come to
an end. And without a major protector,
and with less and less customers to
continue selling their oil to, Saudi
Arabia will have less money to buy
weapons to defend themselves with and
less money to subsidize their restless
population with. And their many, many
enemies, both within the kingdom and
outside of it, will be emboldened like
they have never been before to finally
take their chance at overthrowing the
monarchy. Thus, in order to avoid this
dangerous spiral toward destruction over
the coming decades, Saudi Arabia needs
to radically transform its entire
society and economy if it is going to
survive. And this is why the current
Crown Prince and soon-to-be king of the
country, Mohammed bin Salman, or MBS,
announced with much fanfare the Vision
2030 plan back in 2016, which aims to do
exactly that. Sweeping reforms across
the country have already taken place as
a part of Vision 2030, and more is still
to come. Women were finally granted the
ability to drive in the country in 2018,
while their dress codes in public were
slightly relaxed with the aim of
encouraging and enabling more women to
enter into the Saudi workforce. A push
towards encouraging both religious and
non-religious tourism to the kingdom has
been sent into overdrive with massive
new building developments being put into
motion around the holy city of Mecca in
order to further encourage religious
tourism, and grand mega projects like
the $500 billion futuristic city of
Neom, the Jeddah Tower in the city of
Jeddah planned to be the new tallest
building in the world, and the Red Sea
Islands mega project in the Red Sea, all
set to attract a new set of
non-religious tourists to the kingdom.
Saudi Arabia even managed to secure its
own Grand Prix on the Formula 1 calendar
in 2021, and even announced a brand new
airline in 2023 called
which include the purchase of 72 brand
new Boeing 787 Dreamliners at a price of
$37 billion.
All combined, Saudi Arabia hopes to
establish tourism from all around the
world to the kingdom in order to add
diversification in the economy away from
oil, while investing hundreds of
billions to trillions of dollars at the
same time into a brand new sovereign
wealth fund to invest in companies all
around the world to add even more
diversification. And to diversify away
from their own usage of oil as a fuel
source, the government to invest
aggressively in a solar energy, which in
the deserts of Saudi Arabia does have a
lot of very high potential. But Vision
2030 contains within it two critical
problems for the kingdom. First, while
this process is ongoing and tons of
tourists from the western world begin
coming to the country, while religious
laws in the country are relaxed or
destroyed altogether to continue
encouraging them to come and visit, it
is certain to generate a high degree of
instability among Saudi Arabia's
traditional Sunni Wahhabi
fundamentalists. Osama bin Laden and
al-Qaeda previously went to war with the
Saudi monarchy over their allowance of
US troops into the country to protect
the kingdom. So, what do you think will
happen if and when millions of western
tourists are being allowed to enter the
country? Thus, Saudi Arabia needs as
little external conflicts as possible
while it is focusing on dealing with
this internal conflict for years. Saudi
Arabia thus wants to get out of its
failed war in Yemen, and in March of
2023, they even signed a historic
agreement with Iran, restoring relations
with them and establishing a truce.
Riyadh couldn't possibly be foolish
enough to believe that the truce will
last forever as the revolutionary regime
in Iran will always remain militantly
committed to overthrowing their
monarchy. The Saudis know that the truce
with Iran is a temporary one, but Iran
also wanted to take it so they could
spend the next few years focusing their
efforts on Israel and the United States,
while the Saudis wanted it to spend
crucial time focusing inwards in
implementing these vital reforms. From
Riyadh's perspective, the hope is that
they will finish reforming their society
and emerge stronger before Iran decides
to resume hostilities with them again.
But in order to further guarantee that
Iran and his proxies will stay off of
their back, the Saudis also need to
entice the United States to stick around
as their protector for as long as
possible. They know that America is
naturally losing interest in doing that,
but the Saudis still have levers that
they can pull. They have even suggested
that they might be willing to recognize
Israel [music] and normalize relations
with the Jewish state in exchange for an
ironclad US security guarantee of the
kingdom and the elevation of Saudi
Arabia to the status of a major non-NATO
ally, as well as gaining access to a
civilian nuclear energy program, which
could, in a pinch, enable them to
develop a nuclear weapon on their own if
the Iranians suddenly develop one first.
Washington seems unprepared to accept
those demands for now over fears of
being bound by treaty to go to war with
Iran if the kingdom comes under attack
again, and over fears of nuclear
proliferation spreading across the
Middle East. But the Saudis could
potentially always sweeten the deal
ahead of the November 2024 election by
also agreeing to turn more of their
spare capacity wells back online and
flooding the oil market with their fresh
supply, decreasing global oil prices and
inflationary pressures in America, which
is part of the reason why they've been
cutting production for months. They want
that firm security guarantee bound in
treaty from the United States. And
recognizing Israel will lead to even
more tensions with the Sunni Wahhabi
fundamentalists within the country and
with revolutionary Iran outside of the
country, who is uncompromising on their
aim of destroying Israel and
overthrowing the Saudi monarchy. And the
second problem related to Vision 2030 is
that while it is generating all of this
religious instability within the
kingdom, it is also going to cost an
absolute fortune. Current estimates
believe that the Saudis are going to end
up spending more than $3 trillion
on this plan to reform and diversify the
kingdom. And in order to fund that
enormous amount of money, Saudi Arabia
is gradually selling small amounts of
shares in the state-owned Saudi Aramco
oil company to foreign investors, while
the Saudis simultaneously need higher
global oil prices for several more years
to come in order to add even more money
into the state's coffers before it's all
too late, which is the other reason why
they've been coordinating with the
Russians to decrease production together
in order to keep oil prices elevated for
longer. It's not that Saudi Arabia and
Russia are really aligned in any real
sense, it's just that their interests in
having higher worldwide oil prices are
currently aligned. So, that Moscow has
more money to fight their war in
Ukraine, and Riyadh has more money to
fund their crucially important reforms.
But doing so is also upsetting the
United States to a pretty large degree,
who obviously prefers lower global oil
prices both to deprive the Russians of
more money and to lower gasoline prices
and inflation back at home. The Saudis
are currently playing a very, very
delicate balancing game as they must
simultaneously weigh their own
self-interest to reform or die, which
will cost a lot of money and require
high oil prices, their relationship with
the United States as their biggest
security guarantor and provider of arms,
who prefers lower oil prices, their
relationship with Russia as the second
largest oil exporter in the world, who
can most help them manipulate oil prices
to be higher, but who is stuck in a
proxy war with the United States in
Ukraine, and their relationship with
China, who is the Saudi's single largest
oil customer, but who is also locked in
a sort of cold war with the United
States in the Pacific over Taiwan.
It is a balancing act between all of
these various interests that the Saudi
royal family, led by MBS, must carefully
tread between for decades. And if they
ever stumble along the way during any
part of it, they will all immediately
die and lose everything. And at the same
time, this careful balancing act must
all be maintained as Iran carefully eyes
them with their gains in Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon, and Yemen, and as the 15,000
other members of MBS's own royal family
jockey and position themselves at court
in Riyadh for their own positions of
power. And as the religious
fundamentalists within Saudi Arabia
increasingly feel that the House of Saud
at large is at last
fully betraying them after the and the
Wahhabists is ended. Internal [music]
strife within the kingdom is a
certainty, and the Saudi regime is
already responding to it by cracking
down on emerging Islamist opposition
within the kingdom whenever it can and
outside the kingdom whenever it can.
It's all a part of the very complex
relationship between the Saudi kingdom
and radical Sunni Islamist organizations
with roots in the kingdom like al-Qaeda
and even ISIS. For decades, al-Qaeda
sought to overthrow the Saudi monarchy,
and its strategy to do so has been to
sow as much chaos in the kingdom as
possible by attacking foreigners and
discouraging any tourism to the country,
and attacking skilled workers in the oil
and gas industry and discouraging them
from coming, thus eventually leading to
the kingdom's collapse by the erosion of
both its oil and its tourism industries.
The Saudi state has thus fought back
against al-Qaeda ever since the 1990s.
But a new and perhaps even more menacing
internal and external threat suddenly
appeared on the scene in 2014 when ISIS
exploded across the territory of Iraq
and Syria in a lightning series of
conquests. ISIS, too, just like al-Qaeda
before it, vowed that it would one day
overthrow the Saudi Arabian monarchy
after it completed its conquest of Iraq
and Syria first. And the Saudi monarchy
wasn't put any more at ease after it
turned out that thousands of ISIS's
fighters had in fact come from within
the kingdom and were Saudi citizens.
Thus, in order to destroy the threat,
Saudi Arabia sent military officers to
Syria to help train and equip resistance
fighters fighting against ISIS and join
the American-led military coalition to
destroy ISIS altogether by the end of
2014, a coalition that would eventually
encompass dozens of countries from all
around the world in the largest military
alliance seen in history since the
alliance to destroy Nazi Germany 70
years beforehand.
When you gaze out across a map of the
world, there are few other countries
you'll see on it that appear to be more
twin-like than the duo of Yemen and
Oman. Both countries roughly evenly
divide the southern tip of the Arabian
Peninsula between them. They each have a
very similar-looking shape, and they're
even a very similar sizes, with Yemen
being only slightly larger at around the
same size as France, while Oman is
around the same size as Italy. Neither
of them have any permanent rivers
flowing in their territory, with both of
them being restricted only to seasonal
streams known in Arabic as wadis. And
yet, despite having no permanent rivers,
they also both occupy the two rainiest
locations that can be found on the
Arabian Peninsula in their upper
highland regions. Although, the rainfall
levels seen in Yemen are considerably
higher than those found in Oman. And in
addition to their similar rainfall
levels and similar mountainous and
desert topography, they both contain
similar amounts of geological resources,
as well. Both countries have a very
comparable amount of proven oil and gas
reserves, with Oman only having slightly
more of each. And both countries occupy
strategically important territory that
positions themselves at the feet of
extremely important global maritime
trade routes. Oman controls the valuable
territory directly on the southern edge
of the Strait of Hormuz that funnels
trade routes between the Persian Gulf
and the Indian Ocean, while Yemen
controls the similarly valuable
territory on the eastern side of the Bab
el-Mandeb Strait, which funnels trade
routes between the Suez Canal and the
Indian Ocean, which gives both Yemen and
Oman a degree of immense geopolitical
leverage owing to the spaces on the
board that they each occupy. Both
countries are inhabited by ethnic Arabs
who share a similar language and
culture, and both countries
overwhelmingly follow the Islamic faith.
Sunni Islam is the dominant branch of
the faith in each today in terms of raw
numbers of followers. Though Yemen is
home to a very significant Zaidi Shia
minority, while Oman is home to a very
significant Ibadi minority that has
traditionally ruled the country, and
which is often considered to be a
completely separate branch of the
Islamic faith from the more well-known
Sunni and the Shia. There are a lot of
similarities between Yemen and Oman, not
least of which is their shared border
that runs for 183 miles or 294 km. And
yet, despite all of their similarities
and neighboring locations on the map,
there are perhaps no other two bordering
countries in the entire world today who
experience such radically different
realities today in the 21st century.
Yemen is these days most well-known for
being essentially the poster child of a
failed state. The country has been
locked in a devastating civil war for a
decade now, ever since 2014, that still
doesn't see any end in sight, and which
has resulted in the deaths of hundreds
of thousands of people. Just last month
in March of 2024, the United Nations
still described Yemen as experiencing
one of the worst humanitarian disasters
in the world, with millions of people
remaining forcibly displaced from their
homes, and with roughly 6 million people
remaining on the brink of famine. In
reality, Yemen ceased being a
functioning country years ago, and is
more of a geographic expression these
days than a real country. Yemen's
territory is still divided between
multiple different factions and warlords
supported by various different outside
powers, and many of these factions in
control of Yemen's territory are widely
recognized internationally as terrorist
organizations, such as the Houthis, who
control most of the country's population
centers, and are considered a terrorist
organization by Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates, Malaysia, and the United
States. And there's also Al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula, or AQAP, who also
controls significant territory and is
widely considered a terrorist
organization by dozens of countries all
around the world. Within the past decade
alone, Yemen's territory has been bombed
by foreign countries from all around the
world, and it remains one of the most
deeply dangerous and troubled countries
on the planet. The Human Development
Index, or HDI, is a composite index that
combines scores in a country's per
capita income, access to education, and
access to healthcare to figure out a
score between zero at the lowest and one
at the highest. Yemen's 2023 HDI score
clocked in at an abysmal 0.424,
which is literally the eighth lowest
score in the entire world, and by far
the lowest that can be found anywhere in
the world outside of sub-Saharan Africa.
And most sub-Saharan African nations are
actually doing better than Yemen is,
according to the HDI. And on top of the
abysmal HDI score, Yemen also ranks near
the very bottom on the annual Corruption
Perceptions Index for 2023, as well,
having come in as the fifth most corrupt
country in the entire world, somehow
even beating out the corruption score
for North Korea. Yemen also has one of
the lowest levels of GDP per capita in
the world, one of the highest levels of
poverty in the world, one of the lowest
levels of literacy in the world,
especially for Yemeni women, and a whole
host of other problems that are
genuinely just far too many to even
count. Meanwhile, Oman, just right next
door across the border, couldn't
possibly be any more different. Oman
hasn't seen a war fought in its
territory for decades since the 1970s.
Oman's 2023 HDI score stands at an
impressive 0.819,
which is a massive difference between
them and Yemen of 0.395
basis points. To put that chasm of a
difference in a further perspective,
Oman's HDI score is roughly equivalent
to Romania, while Yemen's is roughly
equivalent to Mali. So, imagine if Mali
and Romania shared a border between each
other. This difference is significantly
larger than even the much-discussed HDI
difference between Haiti and the
Dominican Republic, who share the same
island of Hispaniola in the Caribbean,
and it's probably a larger gap than even
the difference in HDI between North
Korea and South Korea. In fact, the
difference in HDI score across the
border from Yemen to Oman is the second
largest HDI disparity between any two
borders in the entire world,
even larger difference in HDI score
across Yemen's other border into Saudi
Arabia. There is literally nowhere else
on the planet that has as stark of a
difference in HDI score immediately
across borders as between Yemen and its
two neighbors. And it's not just the HDI
score that Oman excels over Yemen with.
The nominal GDP per capita in Oman is
currently a whopping 34 times higher
than it is in Yemen, with Yemen's being
the ninth lowest in the entire world,
and Oman's being roughly equivalent to
Hungary. Despite Yemen's population
being significantly higher than Oman's,
and despite Yemen's control of the most
agriculturally fertile land in the
Arabian Peninsula, and its roughly
similar amount of oil and gas resources
as Oman, Oman's economy is still more
than five times larger than Yemen's is.
Oman's score in the Corruption
Perceptions Index is about on a par with
Italy, which is much, much better than
being the fifth lowest in the entire
world. And the list of differences
really just continues to go on from
there. Oman is ultimately a stable,
prosperous,
healthy nation that is notably ruled by
one of the very few absolute monarchies
remaining in the 21st century. While
Yemen is basically an apocalyptic
nightmare right next door across the
border. So, how did this massive
divergence between two otherwise
similar-looking countries develop into
the way it is today? It didn't just come
out of nowhere, and it begins with a
slight, but notable differences between
each of their geographies. A very
important component of both of these
countries' geographies are their
mountains that separate their interiors
from their coastlines. In the case of
Yemen, their more isolated mountainous
highlands enabled the Zaidi Shia Muslim
movement to emerge as a distinct
religious identity in a region otherwise
dominated by the Sunni branch of Islam.
While in Oman, the presence of the
country's northern mountain chain
separates the interior region from a
more narrow band of coastal plains
immediately budding up against the
Arabian Sea. It was within this isolated
coastal plain geographically separated
from the rest of the Arabian Peninsula
and the Middle East that a unique
Islamic identity took hold that became
known
a branch of Islam that is often regarded
as being distinctly separate from the
larger and more well-known Sunni and
Shia branches. The Ibadis, secure in
their isolated coastal plain here,
developed around the port city of
Muscat. And because of their easy access
to global maritime trade routes out into
the Indian Ocean, they became more
commercially focused, outward-looking,
and cosmopolitan in nature, which has
influenced the Ibadi sect's outlook on
religious tolerance and peaceful
coexistence with other beliefs for
centuries now. The interior of Oman,
conversely, grew to become more
inward-looking, theocratic, and
fundamentalist in nature, not too
dissimilar to the pattern seen in
modern-day Yemen and Saudi Arabia. In
Yemen, the southern coastal areas on the
Gulf of Aden grew to also become more
outward-looking, trade-oriented, and
secular, while the interior mountainous
highlands, home to the Zaidi Shia
movement, grew to become more
inward-looking and theocratic. Just as
in Saudi Arabia, where the coasts were
more cosmopolitan and the interior
around modern-day Riyadh was the
birthplace of the modern-day
ultra-conservative Wahhabi movement in
Sunni Islam. So, Yemen and Oman both
struggled for centuries with this
difference in geography and outlook
between their coastal populations and
interior populations. While Yemen's
northwestern mountains receive many
times more rainfall than anywhere else
in Oman or in the Arabian Peninsula. As
a result, these mountainous parts of
northwestern Yemen are the most
agriculturally productive in the Arabian
Peninsula anywhere outside of Iraq. And
so, they've always been the most densely
populated part of Arabia for thousands
of years, as well. Yemen's agricultural
potential is many times higher than that
of Oman's, and as a result, Yemen has
always had the greater population
between them. Even today, Yemen's 2024
population is nearly 35 million people,
while Oman has fewer than 5 million,
meaning that Yemen has roughly seven
times the population of Oman. But
Yemen's much larger population base
carries with it certain challenges that
have been absent in Oman. In the late
20th century, when large oil and gas
reserves were discovered across both of
them, it turned out that each had pretty
similar amounts, though Oman's were
slightly larger. Oman's greatest
inherent advantage, however, was that
its slightly larger amount of oil and
gas reserves were always going to be
able to go much further in the way of
directly benefiting its much smaller
population. It was always going to be
easier to have these similar amounts of
oil and gas resources benefit the
population of Oman that's just 1/7 of
the size of the population in Yemen. And
Yemen's population is only expected to
continue growing further and further
beyond Oman's because as the two
countries development destinies diverged
radically, so too did each of their
fertility rates. Even though Yemen's
fertility rate has been continually
declining since the late 1980s, it is
still today as of 2023 one of the
highest seen anywhere in the world. The
average Yemeni woman continues to have
3.6 children during her lifetime.
Conversely, Oman's fertility rate has
also continually declined since the
early 1980s, but at a much faster pace
than Yemen's to the point where today
the average Omani woman only has 2.5
children, meaning that with its much
larger population base and much higher
fertility rate, Yemen's population is
going to continue growing multiple times
larger than Oman's will. By the midpoint
of the century in 2050, Yemen's
population is currently projected to
reach a staggering 60 million people,
while Oman's isn't projected to grow
much further than 6 million people,
meaning that by then the Yemeni
population will be about 10 times larger
than Oman's will, which simply means
that Yemen's limited resources will
continue being spread out more thinly
than Oman's will have to be. In addition
to geographic and demographic
differences between the two, there were
also very notable historical differences
between the two that explain a lot of
the current divergence between them as
well. Both countries were conquered or
colonized by non-Arab powers in the 16th
century. The Ottoman Turks took over
most of northern Yemen in 1519 and would
control it for the next 400 years until
the end of World War I, while the
Portuguese took over most Oman in 1507
just a few years before the Ottomans
took over northern Yemen. But the people
around Muscat in modern-day Oman managed
to push out their foreign occupiers
much, much earlier than the Yemenis did.
The Portuguese only stayed around in
Oman for about a century and a half
until 1650, when local Omani tribes from
the interior region managed to push them
out and take over Muscat, after which
they declared the new Sultanate of Oman.
This makes modern Oman the oldest
continuously independent state in the
Arab world today, having remained
largely independent ever since then
right up until the modern day. From
there, the Omanis utilized their
centuries of previous ship and trade
experience and everything they learned
from the Portuguese to then pursue the
Portuguese Empire across the rest of the
Indian Ocean. And in the process, the
Omanis created a vast maritime empire of
their own that at times dominated much
of the Arabian Sea and controlled
overseas territories in modern-day Iran,
Pakistan, India, and all across Eastern
Africa, including the strategically
important trade hub of Zanzibar. The
sprawling Omani Empire was eventually
partitioned in 1856 between the northern
holdings based around modern-day Oman
and the southern holdings based around
Zanzibar in Africa. And so the northern
half became known as the Sultanate of
Muscat and Oman, essentially ruled by a
more secular sultan in the coastal plain
around Muscat and a more theocratic Imam
in the interior region. Muscat and Oman
eventually became a de facto British
protectorate in 1872, but the Sultanate
always retained its internal political
independence and even ceased being a
British protectorate after only a few
decades later in 1920, when it received
its full independence back. The same
wasn't true for Yemen, however, which
endured much longer and deeper
colonization than Oman ever did.
Yemen's densely populated, mountainous,
and largely Zaidi Shia northwest was
controlled by the Ottomans for centuries
until they withdrew from the area after
their defeat in World War I in 1918,
while the rest of modern-day Yemen was
steadily colonized by the British. This
other part of modern-day Yemen without
the rain and agriculture of the
northwest is significantly more sparsely
populated than the northwest of the
country and is largely based around
small, dense clusters of civilization on
the coast like in Aden. Most of this
territory in Yemen outside of the
control of the Ottomans eventually fell
under the colonial influence of the
British, just like Oman eventually did,
but the British came to Yemen much
earlier and stayed for much longer than
they did in Oman. The British were
particularly interested in holding onto
the port of Aden in southern Yemen
directly, one of the most strategically
valuable ports in the entire region
because it's a natural harbor that sits
very close by to the Bab al-Mandab
Strait that all traffic between Europe
and the Indian Ocean has to use when
transiting across the Suez Canal further
north. The British therefore directly
colonized the city of Aden in 1839 and
administered it directly as a colony for
more than a century until the 1960s,
while the remaining sparsely inhabited
hinterlands of southern Yemen were
administered as a protectorate long
after the Ottomans withdrew from the
north in 1918.
The Zaidi Shia of the Yemeni mountains
frequently rebelled against Ottoman rule
and failed. And so after the Ottomans
finally left in 1918 after the last 400
years of control, a theocratic Zaidi
Shia religious leader seized power in
the vacuum and transformed northern
Yemen into a theocratic kingdom that
became the precursor of the modern-day
Houthi movement in Yemen that we know
today. This theocratic kingdom in north
Yemen was led by a Zaidi Shia Imam King
who launched frequent failed invasions
into the southern British Yemen trying
to take it over, while its autocratic
Zaidi Shia absolute theocracy had no
tolerance for Yemen's other internal
religious groups like Sunnis and Jews.
This led to mounting unrest within the
kingdom, especially among the Sunnis,
which culminated with a violent coup
d'état in the kingdom happening in 1962,
when Yemeni military officers overthrew
the Imam King and attempted to install
an Arab nationalist style republic in
its place. The 1962 coup was directly
supported by Gamal Abdel Nasser's Arab
nationalist government in Egypt, while
the deposed monarchy was supported by
other monarchies in the region like
Saudi Arabia, who were fearful of Arab
nationalism and republicanism spreading
and toppling their own monarchies in the
process. What followed became the first
of many devastating modern proxy wars
that have been fought in the territory
of Yemen. As Egypt threw enormous
resources at the nationalist side,
including the overseas deployment of
70,000 of their own soldiers to fight,
while Saudi Arabia and the other Arab
monarchies threw their own resources at
the monarchist side. The civil war went
on for a brutal eight years until 1970
and is believed to have killed anywhere
between 100,000 and 200,000 people in
north Yemen before the nationalist
republican side eventually emerged
victorious and proclaimed the new Yemen
Arab Republic, the very first republic
to ever appear in an Arabian peninsula
that is otherwise completely dominated
by monarchies still today. The presence
of an independent Arab republic in Yemen
and the violent toppling of its monarchy
was a precedent that none of the other
monarchist powers in the Arabian
peninsula wanted to tolerate or accept.
But then, what happened in southern
Yemen somehow became even more radical
and revolutionary. As the civil war was
raging in north Yemen, a group of
radical Yemeni communists managed to
push out the British from Aden in
southern Yemen. And then in 1967, they
proclaimed the independent People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen, the first
and so far only openly communist
Marxist-Leninist state to ever emerge in
either the Arab world or in the Middle
East. By 1970 then, Yemen was divided
between an Arab nationalist republican
government in the north and a
revolutionary communist government in
the south. And so the second proxy war
in Yemen of the modern era began as the
lines of the Cold War overlapped it. The
Americans began supporting the
nationalist north Yemen, while the
Soviets and the Eastern Bloc began very
heavily supporting communist south
Yemen, their only solidly communist
foothold in the Middle East. The rest of
the Arab monarchies, not happy with the
way that the republican government came
into being in north Yemen, still
ultimately all decided to begrudgingly
supported anyway rather than back the
even more radical communist government
in the south that openly wanted to
destroy their monarchies in a wave of
Marxist revolution for the Arabs. North
and south Yemen went on to fight two
brief wars against each other. And in
1978, a north Yemeni military officer
named Ali Abdullah Saleh rose to power
as the country's new president after the
previous one was assassinated. After
rising to power, Saleh then effectively
began treating north Yemen as his own
and his family's personal property. He
was legendarily corrupt and embezzled
ungodly amounts of the country's oil and
gas wealth and foreign aid for his own
personal benefit. He would end up ruling
in Yemen for decades after he took over.
And in 2012, after he was finally
overthrown, a United Nations sanctions
panel had concluded that Saleh was able
to use embezzlement, extortion, and
theft of public funds from the country's
fuel subsidy program to rake in
approximately two billion dollars per
year for his own personal gain. By the
same time in 2012, it was also estimated
by the same UN sanctions panel that
Saleh had spent his decades in power
quietly amassing a personal fortune for
himself anywhere between 32 and 64
billion US dollars, all hidden away in
various offshore bank accounts across at
least 20 different countries. This
easily made him one of the wealthiest
human beings alive anywhere in the world
at the time. And all in a country where
at the time back in 2012, the nominal
GDP per capita was less than $1,400 a
year. To put that in a context, Saleh's
personal wealth in 2012 could have
potentially been nearly twice as large
as Yemen's entire GDP was at the same
time because the man had effectively
plundered the entire country dry for
decades.
After the Soviet Union began collapsing
in 1990, Moscow cut off all of its
subsidies and funding for the communist
government in south Yemen. And south
Yemen's economy practically imploded
overnight without that support. In the
aftermath, the powerless government in
the south agreed to unify the country
with the north and keep north Yemen's
Abdullah Saleh as the unified country's
head of state going forward. But Saleh
immediately began making terrible
foreign policy decisions nearly the
moment the country was unified. Merely
months after Yemen became a unified
country, Saddam Hussein ordered the
Iraqi army to invade and conquer Kuwait.
Saleh then rather foolishly chose to
politically support Saddam during the
invasion. And after Saddam was
decisively defeated and his army
destroyed and Kuwait was liberated,
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia both decided to
immediately end their large amounts of
foreign aid that they had previously
been giving to Yemen. And on top of
that, the Saudis were so infuriated with
Saleh's support of Saddam that they
expelled more than 850,000
Yemeni guest workers from the country
back to Yemen. These hundreds of
thousands of Yemenis have been working
in the Saudi kingdom earning higher
salaries than what they were capable of
back home in Yemen. And they were
sending large amounts of the money they
were earning back home to Yemen as
remittances, which was a huge positive
for the Yemeni economy. Their sudden
expulsion and exile back to Yemen
because of Saleh's foreign policy proved
to be a major economic shock to the
country at the same time as Yemen was
struggling to integrate the South. By
acquiring the formerly communist South
Yemen, Saleh had increased the amount of
oil and gas reserves in his country by
roughly fourfold since the vast majority
of the country's oil and gas was in the
former South Yemen. And like Germany
experienced with the reintegration of
the formerly communist East Germany
after the end of the Cold War, the newly
unified Yemen also struggled to
integrate the formerly communist command
style economy in the South into the
deeply corrupt and crony capitalist
government of the North dominated by
Abdullah Saleh. The acquisition of so
many more oil and gas reserves in South
Yemen was used to essentially line up
Saleh's own pockets even further. While
the simultaneous shock of the 850,000
Yemenis arriving back in the country all
at once from Saudi Arabia and the
further struggles to integrate the
South's formerly communist economy, not
to mention Saleh's own flagrant and
massive corruption, quickly led the
recently unified Yemen right back to the
breaking point. The South rebelled
against Saleh's regime in 1994, only
four years after the unification of the
country happened. And so another brief
civil war exploded in the country. And
then to help put it down, Saleh began
welcoming fighters from what would
eventually become Al-Qaeda into the
country to fight on his behalf against
the South. Al-Qaeda's presence in Yemen
eventually morphed into Al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula, or AQAP, whose
presence in Yemen strained Saleh's
relationship with the United States.
Especially after Al-Qaeda bombed an
American missile cruiser known as the
USS Cole as it was docked in a harbor in
Aden in 2000, which killed 17 American
sailors. Then after 9/11, Washington
took a much more firm line with Saleh's
government in Yemen. And so Saleh began
switching sides to a more pro-US foreign
policy. He allowed the United States
begin conducting drone strikes in Yemen
against suspected Al-Qaeda targets.
While his public support for Washington
enraged many of the more religiously
conservative Zaydi Shia Muslims of the
mountainous interior. That, combined
with Saleh's long autocratic and deeply
corrupt rule in the country and Yemen's
long policies of attempted Sunnification
of the Zaydi Shia, led to significant
unrest mounting beneath the surface that
eventually exploded after the 2011 Arab
Spring protests began sweeping all
across the Middle East. Full-blown
revolution erupted in Yemen afterwards,
and Abdullah Saleh was finally
overthrown from power in early 2012. In
the power vacuum that followed, the
Zaydi Shia of the northwest largely
coalesced under the Houthi movement. And
fighting between them and the Sunni
tribes in Yemen began that eventually
escalated to the point where in 2014,
the Houthis marched on the Yemeni
capital and seized it by force and then
rapidly took control of the country's
government, which led to the devastating
Yemeni civil war that has continued on
ever since that has become the third and
current proxy war fought in Yemen's
territory in recent history. This time
between revolutionary anti-monarchist
theocratic Shia Islamist powers like
Iran and Hezbollah, who support the
Houthis, and the more status quo
monarchist powers like Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates, and Bahrain, who
oppose the Houthis for similar reasons
why they opposed the Arab nationalist
Republicans in the same area during the
civil war of the 1960s.
They fear that a revolutionary
anti-monarchist Islamist victory in
Yemen that brings a Shiite clerical
class into power as a theocracy will
become a direct challenge to their own
continued monarchical rule.
Yemen has been a battlefield for outside
powers from all around the world to
fight in for more than 60 years now. And
while the country was impoverished and
struggling before the current civil war
began in 2014 due to its many chronic
issues, it got much, much worse
afterwards. After the first civil war in
the United Yemen erupted in 1994, the
country's GDP as measured in current US
dollars proceeded to crash by more than
76%
within only two years by 1996.
It then took the country a decade and a
half until 2010 just to recover its GDP
from before the civil war in 1994. And
then Yemen's next civil war began only
four years later after that in 2014,
which led the country's economy to crash
by another 55% by 2021 as the war
continued. While Yemen's oil production
levels crashed right alongside the
economy by nearly just as much as the
civil war intensified. It has since then
gone into the point where in 2023, Yemen
has basically become an irrelevant oil
producer in only 66th place worldwide,
producing even less oil today than
Poland does. Despite Yemen having 30
times as many oil reserves in their
territory as Poland has. And while Yemen
has been a hotbed of instability and
chaos and foreign interventions for
decades, Oman simply hasn't been in a
great deal. A lot of why was the very
different leadership style that was
present in Oman at the same time as
Abdullah Saleh ruled in Yemen. Back in
1970, Oman was still just as hopelessly
poor as Yemen was and was effectively
considered by most of the international
community as an isolated medieval Arab
backwater. The sultan who ruled the
country was an absolute monarch who
dominated every facet of the country's
existence to the point where the
national treasury was kept in a chest
within his own personal palace. After
the communists kicked the British out of
South Yemen and declared the communist
government there, South Yemen began
sponsoring a neighboring communist
insurgency in the far western Dhofar
region of Oman as well. At the time, the
then sultan of Oman was basically an
ultra-conservative and eccentric Luddite
who had outlawed virtually all
technological development in the country
preferring to keep everything as close
to the medieval era as possible to the
detriment of his own people. He also
used his absolute authority to outlaw
fairly arbitrary things like speeding
anyone in the country for more than 15
minutes, wearing sunglasses, smoking,
and playing football. The sultan was
thus deeply unpopular in Oman as a
result. And so, fearful that communism
could end up spreading from South Yemen
across Oman to replace the sultan, the
British decided to intervene in their
former protectorate in 1970 by
sponsoring a coup d'état led by the
sultan's young son, Qaboos bin Said. The
coup that followed was entirely
bloodless. The sultan was successfully
overthrown and exiled to England while
the young Qaboos took over in his place.
And as it turned out, the new Sultan
Qaboos was an incredibly competent
administrator. While he continued on
with a system of absolute monarchy in
Oman with himself remaining as the
ultimate political authority, Sultan
Qaboos was essentially a 20th and 21st
century version of an enlightened
monarch like Frederick the Great. He was
a reformist who liberalized and
revolutionized Omani society for the
benefit of the kingdom's people. He
welcomed foreign energy companies like
Shell to expand their oil and gas
exploration and production in the
kingdom, and he heavily reinvested the
kingdom's growing oil and gas wealth
back into the country itself. When
Sultan Qaboos took power in Oman in
1970, the entire country was home to a
mere three schools, 19 medical
facilities, and only 10 km worth of
paved roads. Within a decade and a half
by 1985, Qaboos utilized the kingdom's
oil and gas wealth to build out 500 new
schools, 100 new medical facilities, and
more than 3200 km worth of additional
paved roads, which [music] greatly
increased the development of the nation
and the people's quality of life. Qaboos
immediately outlawed slavery in Oman
when he came to power. He granted women
in the kingdom the right to vote, and he
established a brand new parliament that
consisted of elected officials to
support the monarchy. He used this rapid
development of the kingdom and the
support of British and Iranian troops
deployed by the Shah to quell the
communist rebellion in the Dhofar
province. And as the country's wealth
was continually reinvested into the
country's development and the people's
living standards continued rising, the
level of remaining unrest began to
evaporate. Far from plundering the
country of its resources and wealth dry
like Abdullah Saleh did in Yemen, Sultan
Qaboos poured his nation's wealth into
developing the kingdom for the benefit
of the people and sunk billions of
dollars into diversifying the country's
economy away from oil and gas to open up
other major economic sectors like
tourism. Qaboos's strategy in
modernization was so enormously
effective in Oman that in 2010, the
United Nations bestowed Oman with the
honor of being first in the entire world
for the advancement of their HDI score
over the past 40 years, surpassing even
the much more well-publicized example of
China. Oman's oil and gas production
rates continued increasing in this
environment of stability as foreign
companies found it more prudent to
invest in in comparison to the basket
case in neighboring Yemen. Sultan Qaboos
was also insistent on a forward-looking
policy that he called Omanization in the
kingdom's oil and gas industry. That is,
the foreign energy companies that set up
operations in Oman would have to hire
local Omani workers and give them
working experience in the industry so
that over time, Oman would be able to
reduce the reliance on foreign employees
and companies and begin taking over
control of more and more of the
kingdom's oil and gas for themselves.
Oman also simply didn't have the long
history of divided rule between separate
regions of the country the same way that
Yemen did. Where Yemen had been divided
between an Ottoman north and a British
south for more than a century and then
between a nationalist north and a
communist south for decades until the
1990s, Oman had remained a mostly
unified nation for centuries and had
been free of Britain's protectorate for
decades. Oman Oman didn't have to
reintegrate a communist society and
economic system the same way that Yemen
needed to do. While Sultan Qaboos went
further and enshrined a policy of
religious tolerance within Oman. While
he himself and most of the ruling class
in Oman followed the Ibadi branch of
Islam, all of his subjects were granted
religious freedom and were allowed to
mostly follow whatever they wanted. A
policy that was again very separate from
the deeply sectarian politics over in
nearby Yemen. That frequently pitted the
country's Zaidi Shia community up
against the Sunni community. And
alongside Sultan Qaboos's policy of
reinvesting the country's oil wealth
back into the country to further the
pace of development and modernization,
he also began pursuing a rather unique
foreign policy in the region that
complemented his domestic strategy of
stability very well. Whereas Yemen was
frequently the site of various proxy
wars all throughout its history. And
Abdullah Saleh pursued an
interventionist foreign policy that
frequently got him and Yemen into
trouble by supporting Saddam's invasion
of Kuwait and then working with Al-Qaeda
and later with the United States. Sultan
Qaboos put Oman down the path of radical
neutrality in the dangerous neighborhood
of the Middle East. Part of this
strategy was aided by geography. Because
of Oman's northern mountain range, the
population core of the kingdom around
the capital Muscat has always been
isolated and separated from the rest of
the Middle East. The political dominance
of the Ibadi branch of the Islamic faith
in Oman has always been unique in the
context of the greater Muslim world and
has put it apart from every other Muslim
country that is politically or
democratically dominated by the much
larger Sunni or Shia branches instead.
This naturally set the Omani Sultanate
up to become the go-to mediator in
disputes all across the region between
the Sunni and the Shia. Because as a
separate Ibadi ruled state, they could
be viewed by both Sunni and Shia as a
true neutral party. Sultan Qaboos
wielded this perceived neutrality of the
Ibadi sect and then effectively
transformed Oman into the Switzerland of
the Middle East. He led Oman into
continuing relations with the Ayatollahs
of Iran after the Islamic Revolution
overthrew the Shah in 1979. He led Oman
to become the very first Gulf Arab state
to welcome an Israeli Prime Minister in
1994, Yitzhak Rabin. In the 21st
century, when the Saudi's sent tanks
rolling across their bridge into the
island kingdom of Bahrain in 2011 to put
down a popular Shiite revolution there
against the kingdom's Sunni led
monarchy, Oman continued to remain
neutral. When the Houthis overran the
Yemeni capital and most of the country's
population centers in 2014 and the
Saudi's created a military coalition in
2015 to intervene in Yemen against them,
Oman once again chose to remain neutral
in the war. And the following year in
2016, when diplomatic relations between
Saudi Arabia and Qatar broke down over a
number of issues and the Saudi's began
championing a blockade and embargo of
Qatar, Oman once again still chose to
remain neutral. By remaining neutral in
all of the multiple conflicts in the
Middle East and advancing itself as the
go-to mediator in all of the region's
numerous disputes, Oman was able to
safeguard its own stability in a
dangerous neighborhood even further and
cemented itself as a highly valuable
geopolitical asset. And by doing so, it
also made itself an indispensable ally
and friend to just about every single
one of its neighbors. And that further
cemented Oman's value to perhaps their
greatest supporter, the United States.
Washington found Oman's friendly
relations with every country in the
Middle East to be especially useful. So
much so that during the Obama
administration, Oman was the site of
high-level diplomatic talks between the
Americans and Iranians that led to the
so-called Iran nuclear deal between them
in 2015. Oman has hosted American troops
in their country for decades now out of
the airbase RAFO Thumrait in the Dhofar
region. An airbase that the US Air Force
has used to support operations in Iraq
and Afghanistan for decades now. Oman's
value to Washington is considered to be
so great that ever since 2009, the
United States has maintained a
comprehensive free trade agreement with
Oman. One of only 20 nations worldwide
that the US has these kinds of trade
agreements with. Sultan Qaboos ruled his
kingdom for nearly 50 years continually
from 1970 when he overthrew his father
to his death in 2020 just a few years
ago. During that time, he oversaw Oman's
complete transformation from an isolated
medieval backwater into a modern
developed 21st century nation. Oman's
GDP per capita was a paltry $382
per person adjusted for inflation when
he took the throne back in 1970, which
was about on a par with sub-Saharan
African nations at the time like Zambia
and Zimbabwe. Within two years of his
death by 2022, the nation's inflation
adjusted GDP per capita had increased by
more than 65 times over to more than
$25,000
per person. He introduced the nation's
first political constitution in 1996.
And for decades throughout his rule, he
undertook an annual tour of his kingdom
to visit with his own people and hear
about their concerns directly. His twin
foreign policy of extreme neutrality and
his domestic policy of rapid
reinvestment and development transformed
Oman into a wealthy bastion
in the sea of chaos in the Middle East.
And though he was an absolute monarch
who banned opposing political parties
and ran what has sometimes been
described as a benevolent police state,
Sultan Qaboos was generally a beloved
champion of the Omani people. When the
Arab Spring swept unrest across the
region in 2011, protests broke out in
Oman just as they did elsewhere. But
Sultan Qaboos immediately addressed them
with a promise to create more jobs and
boost incomes. He opened up the
government's finances for the benefit of
his people over himself. And the
protests quieted down and quickly went
away. His decades of forward-looking and
prudent leadership in Oman contrasts
extremely sharply with that of Abdullah
Saleh's decades of rule in neighboring
Yemen, which were spent effectively
plundering the country for his own
personal benefit that awarded him no
affection when unrest came to Yemen
after 2011, too. And after the Sultan's
death in 2020, his forward-looking and
sound policies appear to have continued
under the reign of his cousin and the
current Sultan, Haitham bin Tariq.
Oman's decades of stability and rising
oil and gas output and rising economy
attracted further foreign investment
into the country, which enabled Oman to
extend its oil and gas production and
exports even further and earn even more
money. In the process though, Oman also
transformed into effectively a
petrostate. Oil and gas currently
represents 64% of the country's export
revenue, 45% of the government's income,
and half of its entire GDP. This has
exposed Oman to economic shocks whenever
the global price of oil decreases, which
is partially what sparked protests in
the kingdom in the 2010s. But the
country has been aggressively investing
into diversifying itself away from oil
by building out alternative economic
sectors. Like most of the other Gulf
states, Oman has been particularly
trying to build out a robust tourism
industry for itself. In 2023, the
kingdom welcomed more than 4 million
tourists to the country. And Oman
currently has about $6 billion worth of
tourism related investments in dozens of
projects currently on the table to
expand their tourism sector even
further. Meanwhile, Yemen is frequently
considered as one of, if not the most
dangerous countries in the world to
visit. And so the country has virtually
zero tourism and this only further
compounds Oman's economic advantages
over Yemen. The two neighboring
countries have also diverged over time
in another very notable way as well.
Their radically different uses of their
scarce water in agriculture. While Yemen
indeed has the most agriculturally
productive land in the Arabian
Peninsula, it has been very
inefficiently used for decades now to
produce a plant known as qat. Qat is a
mildly narcotic plant that when chewed
releases natural stimulants to the
person chewing. And its use has fairly
recently become a very widespread
phenomenon across Yemen. In 2007, the
United Nations conducted a specific
report on the nature of qat chewing in
Yemen and found that as recently as the
1960s, the chewing of qat was only an
occasional pastime in the country that
was largely enjoyed only by the rich.
From there, however, qat chewing somehow
spread across Yemen to become a
virtually ubiquitous hobby. The 2007 UN
study concluded that a whopping 72% of
men in Yemen and 33% of women chewed qat
regularly with many chewing it every
day. It concluded that more than one in
five qat users in Yemen spent more than
six hours a day chewing it. While more
than 93% of users spent more than two
hours a day chewing it, which takes away
productivity from the workplace all
across the country and negatively
impacts the Yemeni economy even further
than everything else already does. The
wide-scale cultivation of qat for this
large-scale domestic consumption within
Yemen has also crowded out the nation's
valuable and limited agricultural land
and supplanted the cultivation of more
valuable cash crops that Yemen used to
export for revenue like coffee and
fruits. Qat production in Yemen is
almost entirely consumed within Yemen.
And because qat is a very
water-intensive crop to grow, the
cultivation of qat in Yemen is currently
believed to consume a massive 30% of the
entire country's limited supply of
irrigation water. The ubiquitous
consumption of qat in Yemen therefore
increases the country's poverty even
further as it makes workers less
economically productive, consumes huge
amounts of the country's increasingly
scarce water supply, and crowds out the
growing of other crops that would be
more valuable to export in its place.
Meanwhile, while qat chewing is
incredibly common in Yemen, it is
severely illegal in other nearby Arab
states. Qat smuggling is punishable by
up to life imprisonment in the United
Arab Emirates. While in Oman, it is even
punishable by the death penalty. Qat
chewing is therefore an almost
completely absent hobby in Oman. As are
all of qat's associated negative
economic effects that are present in
Yemen. And ultimately, these are the
many, many reasons why Oman is just in a
much better place than Yemen is today.
It is the result of decades of diverging
policies and leadership in the two
countries that have resulted in wildly
different institutions and realities
emerging in both of them. And as the
civil war in Yemen continues on and as
the Houthis continue inviting
international outsiders like the US and
UK to intervene with their attacks on
maritime shipping in the region. The
divergence between Oman and Yemen is
likely only going to continue growing
even further with time. It will take a
massive shift in Yemen's leadership and
fortunes to bring about true change, but
that doesn't appear to be on the horizon
anytime soon.
On the 29th of September 2023, the
United States National Security Advisor
who reports directly to the President,
Jake Sullivan, was speaking at the
annual Atlantic Festival listing off all
of the accomplishments that the Biden
administration had achieved in the
Middle East. After years of brutal
warfare that had resulted in more than
300,000 deaths, a 19-month-long truce in
civil war-torn Yemen was continuing to
hold. The long-running civil war in
Syria was beginning to stabilize and
settle down as well. While Bashar
al-Assad, the long-time Syrian dictator,
was finally being welcomed back into the
Arab League again after more than a
decade-long suspension over his handling
of the war in Syria that had claimed the
lives of more than half a million
people. Brokered by China, Saudi Arabia
and Iran had finally agreed on restoring
their relations in March of 2023 after
having been severed six years
previously. Brokered by America, Saudi
Arabia and Israel were also on the cusp
of normalizing their relations. Iran's
attacks against American military bases
had stopped and there was a general
sense in much of the world that the
chronically violent and unstable Middle
East was at last beginning to calm down
and enter into a new era of peace. Jake
Sullivan himself summed up the general
foreign policy mood in the region during
that speech on the 29th of September
when he said the following. And the
Middle East region is quieter today
than it has been in two decades. Now,
challenges remain. Iran's nuclear
weapons program,
the tensions between Israelis and
Palestinians, but the amount of time
that I have to spend on crisis and
conflict in the Middle East today
compared to any of my predecessors going
back to 9/11 is significantly reduced.
It would only take two weeks for those
words to immediately come back and haunt
him. On the 7th of October 2023, various
Palestinian militant groups led by
Hamas, the organization who rules in the
Gaza Strip, launched a highly
coordinated surprise land, sea, and air
offensive against Israel. They managed
to fire at least 5,000 rockets against
Israel while around 2,500 armed Hamas
fighters managed to break through the
wall surrounding Gaza and infiltrated
into multiple villages of Israel itself,
where they massacred at least 1,400
Israelis and other citizens in a single
day, wounded more than 5,000 others, and
took around 200 more as hostages back
into Gaza. The attack represented the
single bloodiest day in the entire
history of Israel and the first time
since 1948 that a hostile outside
military power managed to break into
Israel proper. It all came as a profound
shock to the state of Israel, which has
since responded with an unprecedented
declaration of war against Hamas in
Gaza. That was followed up by the rapid
mobilization of 300,000 Israeli reserve
troops, the largest and quickest call-up
of reserves in Israel's entire history.
The 16-year-long Israeli blockade of
Gaza then subsequently transformed into
a complete and total Israeli siege of
Gaza with the Israelis blocking off all
electricity, fuel, telecommunications,
water, and medicine from passing into
Gaza through any of their territory by
land, sea, or air. The Israeli Air Force
began initiating a punishing aerial
campaign across the Gaza Strip that saw
more than 6,000 Israeli bombs dropped
across the territory within only the
first six days of the war beginning,
more than double the amount of ordinance
that the United States-led coalition
dropped in an entire month in the war
against ISIS. As the Israeli airstrikes
continued on the 13th of October, Israel
ordered that more than 1.1 million
Palestinians immediately evacuate from
the northern Gaza Strip towards the
southern Gaza Strip within 24 hours or
be potentially considered as enemy
combatants. And then two weeks later on
the 27th of October, the Israeli ground
forces launched their full-scale
invasion into the northern Gaza Strip
and as of the production of this video,
have Gaza City, the biggest city in
Palestine with a pre-war population of
more than 560,000
people, completely encircled. Once the
Israeli ground forces push into Gaza
City, they will likely experience what
many military analysts believe will be
nothing less than the most ferocious
urban combat seen in history since the
Second World War. While Israel's stated
military objective going forward is to
completely destroy Hamas as an
institution and its estimated 40,000
fighters held up in the Gaza Strip while
securing the release of the more than
200 hostages that they continue to hold.
And in pursuit of those war aims, the
Gaza Health Ministry, run by Hamas,
claims that as of the production of this
video, the Israeli airstrikes and ground
invasion have already killed nearly
10,000 Palestinians within the Gaza
Strip and wounded nearly 25,000
more. In addition to the estimated 1,000
or so Hamas fighters who were killed
within Israel during the initial October
7th invasion, a truly catastrophic war
has thus once again returned to the
Middle East. And the longer that the war
continues, the longer it risks spreading
like a contagion to drag in multiple
other powers into an even greater Middle
East-wide war. The brief era of peace
and stability in the Middle East has
once again been shattered. And in order
to understand why this is all suddenly
happening right now, you only have to go
back a few years ago to 2017 in order to
understand how the countdown to war in
October of 2023 began originally
ticking. By the time that 2017 rolled
around, the de facto geopolitical
situation of the area was roughly the
same as it had been for the past decade
ever since 2007. How it got there in
2007 was a very, very complicated story.
But to cover through it all very
quickly, the British Empire acquired
this territory in the eastern
Mediterranean known as Mandatory
Palestine after defeating the Ottoman
Empire in World War I who had ruled the
area for centuries beforehand. Most of
the people who lived in the mandate at
that time were Arabs, but Jewish
immigration to the land was increasing
in scale as the Zionist movement in
Europe sought to flee increasing
anti-Semitism in places like Russia and
later Germany by establishing an
independent Jewish state in the land of
their ancient ancestors. The British
openly stated that they would support
the creation of a Jewish state in
Mandatory Palestine through the Balfour
Declaration of 1917,
though with vague and undetermined
borders. As more Jews increasingly came
to Mandatory Palestine, especially after
the Nazis rose to power in Germany, the
Arabs of the territory resented seeing
more of their land getting taken over
and so they revolted in 1936. The
British squashed that rebellion, but
they attempted to placate the Arabs by
restricting further Jewish immigration
and land purchases within the mandate.
But this policy angered Jewish groups in
the mandate and so Jewish militant
groups formed who launched their own
rebellion and violence between
themselves and the Arabs escalated even
further. By 1947, the British decided to
give up and withdraw from Mandatory
Palestine altogether and so they
submitted the matter of what to do with
it to the United Nations who, in the
wake of the Holocaust in Europe, faced
growing international pressure for the
creation of an independent Jewish state.
They came up with the 1947 UN Partition
Plan which called for partitioning
Mandatory Palestine into three separate
states, an independent Jewish state, an
independent Palestinian Arab state, and
an internationally run city-state in
Jerusalem. The Arab side in particular
resented this proposal at the time
though as they argued it was too heavily
biased towards the Jewish side who were
granted most of the mandate's land
despite only representing about 1/3 of
the mandate's population at the time.
The Jewish side, meanwhile, had
misgivings about the plan as well since
most of the big cities and the actual
arable land went to the Arab state while
Jerusalem itself was surrounded by Arab
territory. But nonetheless, the Jewish
side ultimately accepted the plan while
virtually the entire Arab world
condemned the UN plan and rejected it
and the violence between the Palestinian
Arabs and the Jews in the mandate only
worsened. In 1948, Israel declared its
independence from the mandate based on
the 1947 UN Plan boundaries, but the
Palestinians and a coalition of outside
Arab states refused to recognize them
and immediately invaded, determined to
overturn the UN Partition Plan that they
saw as just another form of colonialism
seeking to steal more of their land. But
Israel ended up winning that war and
agreed on an armistice with the Arab
states who attacked them in 1949. The
so-called Green Line marked the military
front line between the Israelis and the
Arab states as it stood when that
armistice agreement was signed. And
though all of the Arab states at the
time were very clear that the Green Line
did not mark any final or agreed-upon
borders, it did mark the de facto border
between themselves and Israel
nonetheless. At the same time, the Gaza
Strip fell under the control of Egypt,
the West Bank fell under the control of
Jordan, while Jerusalem itself became
divided between Israeli control in the
west and Jordanian control in the east.
Israel's own expansion well beyond their
originally accepted 1947 UN Partition
Plan area also put them in control over
large swaths of Palestinian Arab lands,
which resulted in about 700,000 of them
who either fled or forcibly pushed out
in an event that became known as the
Nakba or the catastrophe with many of
them fleeing towards the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank and others towards Jordan,
Syria, and Lebanon. And so an
independent Palestinian state was
immediately extinguished. At the same
time in 1949, there were approximately 1
million Jews of Mizrahi and Sephardi
ancestry who lived all across the Muslim
world as their ancestors had for
thousands of years. But over the decades
that followed as Israel established
itself further, the vast majority of
them were either forcibly expelled,
fled, or voluntarily migrated away in a
mass Jewish exodus away from the Muslim
world and largely towards Israel. As a
result, fewer than 30,000 Jews continue
to live in the Muslim world today, down
from around a million in 1948.
Today, these Middle Eastern and North
African Jews who left and their
descendants comprise more than 50% of
the Israeli Jewish population and
represent the country's single largest
ethnic group today. While another 32% of
the Israeli Jewish population are of
Ashkenazi ancestry from Eastern and
Central Europe, who represent the second
largest group. Ever since that time,
both the Palestinians and the Israelis
have struggled defining where one of
their territories begins and the other
ends within the overall territory of the
former British Mandate and have with
achieving universal recognition by the
outside world. Israel's mostly
internationally recognized boundaries
today consist of that so-called green
line dating back to 1949. But there were
also the additional territories that
came under Israel's control during the
later Six-Day War of 1967 that lay
beyond the 1949 Armistice Green Line.
Territories that are usually referred to
as either the post-1967 territories or
the Israeli-occupied territories. They
include the Sinai Peninsula seized from
Egypt, the Palestinian-inhabited
territories that Israel seized from
Egypt and Jordan, the Gaza Strip, the
West Bank, and East Jerusalem, and the
Golan Heights that were seized from
Syria. After Israel seized all of these
territories back in 1967, the United
Nations Security Council passed
Resolution 242, which effectively
considered them all as occupied
territories that the Israelis should
immediately withdraw from. While the
Arab League convened at Khartoum in
Sudan, where they proclaimed the 1967
Khartoum Resolution, explicitly laying
out their foreign policy towards Israel
going forward. No peace with Israel, no
recognition with Israel, and no
negotiations with Israel. A policy that
became known as the Arab world's three
nos, and the foundation upon which no
Arab state would recognize Israel's
existence in any context or shape for
decades. Over the decades that followed
from 1967, Israel treated each of their
post-1967 acquired territories very
differently. Israel agreed to return the
Sinai Peninsula back to Egypt in 1979 in
exchange for a formal peace treaty with
Egypt and Egyptian recognition of
Israel's right to exist. Marking the
first time that an Arab state would ever
do such a thing, and the first time that
an Arab state would violate the three
nos agreed upon by the Arab League back
in the 1967 Khartoum Resolution. Israel
then unilaterally decided to annex all
of East Jerusalem in 1980 and
subsequently proclaimed a unified
Jerusalem as its own capital city.
Something that the United Nations would
immediately declare as legally null and
void under international law with
Resolution 478 that considered East
Jerusalem to still be an
Israeli-occupied territory, and which
also called upon all UN member states to
withdraw their embassies from Jerusalem
in the aftermath, which everybody
eventually agreed to do. By the time
2017 rolled around, there wasn't a
single other country in the world
outside of Israel who recognized
Israel's annexation of East Jerusalem or
Jerusalem as the sole capital of Israel.
Israel also decided to unilaterally
annex the Golan Heights outright back in
1981, an action that the United Nations
similarly declared under the passing of
Resolution 497 immediately afterwards as
null and void and without international
legal effect. The Golan Heights would
continue to be universally recognized by
the entire international community as
Israeli-occupied territory of Syria for
decades, and this also continued to
remain true by 2017. That left the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip, which Israel
has also treated very differently from
all of the other post-1967 territories.
Egypt renounced its claim to the Gaza
Strip in the peace treaty with Israel in
1978, while Jordan formally renounced
its claims to the West Bank and East
Jerusalem a decade later in 1988 before
becoming the second Arab state to make
peace with Israel and recognize Israel's
existence in 1994. Those renunciations
by Egypt and Jordan to the Gaza Strip,
the West Bank, and East Jerusalem, and
Israel's continued internationally
unrecognized occupation of all of them
left them each effectively as
Palestinian-inhabited territories
trapped in a state of permanent legal
limbo for decades. As thousands of
Israeli settlers began moving into all
of them and displacing and angering the
Palestinians who lived within them even
further. After decades of violence
between the Israeli authorities and the
settlers on one side and the
Palestinians on the other in both the
West Bank and East Jerusalem and the
Gaza Strip, the Israelis and the
Palestinians eventually agreed upon the
Oslo Accords of 1993 and 1995, which
established the Palestinian Authority as
an interim Palestinian government body
that was eventually assumed would one
day take over full authority in the
entire occupied West Bank, East [music]
Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip as the
eventually fully independent state of
Palestine. But in the interim until
then, the Israeli and Palestinian sides
agreed on what originally was supposed
to only be a temporary division of the
West Bank [music] into three distinctly
different areas with varying levels of
control between the Palestinian
Authority and the Israeli military and
state. Area A would be the territories
assigned entirely to the civil and
security administration run by the
Palestinian Authority. Area B would be
the territories assigned to only the
civil administration run by the
Palestinian Authority, but with a
security administration that would
continue to be run by the Israelis. And
then, there was also Area C, which would
continue to be entirely run by both the
Israeli civil and military authorities
without any influence from the
Palestinian Authority at all, which
effectively placed Area C under the
continued de facto control of Israel.
Area C consists of approximately 61% of
the West Bank's total territory and is
presently the home of all of Israel's
settlements and settlers in the West
Bank, wedged all in between the
Palestinian Authority's Area A and Area
B, and ringed all around Jerusalem,
where more than 99% of all the land is
either strictly off-limits or heavily
restricted for Palestinians to access.
Area C is also completely contiguous in
area, while the Palestinian Authority's
administered territories in Areas A and
B are not contiguous and divided between
165 separate enclaves in between the
contiguous Israeli-administered Area C
that is chock-full of Israeli
settlements in a situation that has
sometimes been referred to as the
Palestinian Archipelago of the West
Bank, and a system that has been very
frequently compared to the system of
apartheid that white-ruled South Africa
enforced upon their black population
until 1994.
It was initially intended by the Oslo
Accords of 1995 that all of Area C would
be gradually transferred by the Israelis
over to the Palestinian Authority's
administration. But to date, that has
never ended up happening. Within 1 week
of the Oslo II Accord being signed on
the 28th of September, 1995, that
established the system of Areas A and B
in the West Bank and granted the
Palestinian Authority limited control,
the Israeli Prime Minister who signed
them, Yitzhak Rabin, was assassinated by
an Israeli right-wing extremist who was
opposed to the concept of any
independent Palestinian entity. And the
next election that came the following
year in 1996 brought Benjamin Netanyahu
into the office of Israel's Prime
Minister for the first time, which
resulted in a stalling of any further
negotiations between the Palestinian
Authority and Israel. The supposedly
temporary divisions within the West Bank
agreed upon in 1995 immediately before
Yitzhak Rabin's assassination have
remained indefinite ever [music] since,
and the pace of Israeli settlers moving
into Area C has only continued. At the
current date in 2023, it's estimated
that around 230,000
Israeli settlers live in the post-1967
territory of East Jerusalem, while
another 470,000
Israeli settlers live within Area C of
the West Bank across at least 132
separate settlements and more than 140
separate outposts, where they have full
civil and political rights like every
other Israeli citizen does, and
representing a fourfold increase in
Israeli settlers in the West Bank since
the Oslo Accords were initially signed
in 1995.
This is in comparison to around 300,000
Palestinians who also live within Area C
and are subject to Israeli military
rule. Another roughly 2.8 million
Palestinians who live confined within
the Palestinian Archipelago of Areas A
and B under the Palestinian Authority's
administration in the West Bank. And
another 362,000
Palestinians who live within the
Israeli-annexed East Jerusalem. All of
whom have almost zero say over how they
are actually governed. Israel's
continued control over Area C in the
West Bank for decades and hundreds of
thousands of settlers that they have
allowed to move into the territory since
the 1990s have been frequently labeled
as a violation of Article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which plainly
states that, quote, "The occupying power
shall not deport or transfer parts of
its own civilian population into the
territory that it occupies." In this
case, being the West Bank. Meanwhile, by
2005, Israel maintained about 8,000
settlers across 21 different settlements
in the Gaza Strip. But by then, the
situation was becoming untenable. At
only about twice the size of Washington,
D.C., the Gaza Strip was geographically
much smaller than the West Bank was. But
with a population of 1.4 million
Palestinians back then, it was also
substantially more densely populated and
urbanized than the West Bank was as
well. The high cost associated with
defending only a few thousand settlers
in this crowded urbanized territory was
becoming too costly for Israel to bear.
And so, in 2005, they decided to
unilaterally withdraw from the Gaza
Strip altogether. All of the 21 Israeli
settlements inside of it were destroyed.
All 8,000 Israeli settlers within Gaza
were either evacuated or forcibly
withdrawn, while the military withdrew
as well. And for the first time, the
entirety of the Gaza Strip's land
territory was passed over to the
Palestinian Authority. Although Israel
continued maintaining control over
virtually all of Gaza's land crossings
with a fence they constructed around the
entire territory back in 1994, along
with continued control over all of
Gaza's airspace that included Israel's
destruction of the only airport in the
Gaza Strip back in 2002. And then,
finally, came the Palestinian
Legislative Elections of January 2006
shortly afterwards, in which the
political party known as Hamas achieved
an unexpectedly decisive victory. Before
then, the Palestinian Authority had been
always controlled and dominated by the
secular, socialist, and Palestinian Arab
nationalist party known as Fatah, who
had initially seek Israel's total
destruction and the establishment of a
secular Palestinian Arab socialist state
over the entirety of the former British
Mandate area in its place. But it
subsequently made peace with Israel
during the Oslo Accords and then
restricted their ambitions to
establishing an independent Palestinian
state limited only to the West Bank,
East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip
instead. By contrast, Hamas was a Sunni
Islamist and Palestinian nationalist
party who argued that Fatah had become
too complacent and too cooperative with
Israel and had abandoned the true
original Palestinian cause. Hamas
continued to be fully committed to
Israel's total destruction, the same way
that Fatah had used to be prior to the
Oslo Accords. And separately from Fatah,
Hamas advocated for the eventual
establishment of a Sunni Islamist
Palestinian state across the entirety of
the former British Mandate area once
Israel had been completely destroyed.
After a brief civil war within the
Palestinian Authority between Hamas and
Fatah, Hamas emerged victorious within
the Gaza Strip and pushed Fatah out
completely by the middle of 2007, which
has ever since led to a continuous
division within the Palestinian
leadership. The Sunni Islamists of Hamas
based in the Gaza Strip, who are fully
dedicated to Israel's total destruction
and the eventual establishment of a
Sunni Islamic state across the entirety
of the former British Mandate in its
place, and the secular, socialist, and
nationalist Fatah based in the
Palestinian archipelago of the West
Bank, willing to work together with
Israel to eventually establish an
independent Palestinian state based on
the entirety of the West Bank, East
Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip, while
recognizing Israel's own borders based
on the 1949 Armistice Green Line. The
same way that Egypt and Jordan do. But
Israel responded to Hamas's
uncompromising takeover of the Gaza
Strip in 2007 by initiating a complete
land, air, and sea blockade over the
territory that harshly limited the
ability of Palestinians or goods to exit
or enter. A blockade that Gaza's other
neighbor, Egypt, agreed to fully
participate in on their side of the
border as well. The 1994 era fence
surrounding Gaza by land across Israel
and Egypt was then extensively upgraded
into the modern system of high walls,
barbed wire, motion sensors, and even
robotic machine guns. While the Israeli
Navy enforced a maritime no-go zone
around the Gaza Strip by sea, while the
Israeli Air Force enforced a no-fly zone
over the Gaza Strip's airspace. Israel's
stated aims of enforcing the blockade
over the Gaza Strip were to restrict the
ability of the Hamas-led government
inside from being able to import weapons
from abroad to use against Israel, and
to economically strangle the Hamas-led
government and apply pressures on it to
either moderate its position or face a
slow, grinding collapse with a permanent
scarcity of resources and supplies,
generating unrest amongst the
Palestinians they were elected to
govern. But for the past 16 years that
have followed this blockade of Gaza
beginning, Hamas has neither moderated
its position nor collapsed from power.
While frequent fighting has consistently
erupted between them and Israel ever
since. And so, the joint
Israeli-Egyptian blockade has continued
on without a pause now for the past 16
years that have followed ever since
2007. A situation that has been
frequently labeled as one of the 21st
century's vastest humanitarian
catastrophes. Israel's 16-year ongoing
blockade of Gaza has been frequently
labeled by human rights advocates as a
form of collective punishment applied to
everyone who lives within the Gaza
Strip. While Israel has always
counter-maintained that the policy is
necessary to protect their own citizens
from attacks coming from Hamas. Notably,
Gaza's population has increased from
about 1.4 million people when the
blockade began in 2007 to about 2.2
million people today in 2023. Meaning
that about 800,000
of the Palestinians within the Gaza
Strip, or about 40% of the entire
population right now, are currently
children 16 years or younger who have
been born during this total blockade and
who have literally never known anything
other than life confined within the
walls enforced by the Israeli military
and stuck under Hamas's continued
uncompromising leadership. And all of
the accompanying poverty, hunger,
resource scarcity, and occasional
ferocious violence that has come with
it. At only about twice the size of
Washington, D.C., the Gaza Strip has
since become one of the most crowded and
densely populated places anywhere in the
entire world. And surrounded by high
walls and a naval blockade on all sides
and an enforced no-fly zone above it,
where hardly anyone is ever allowed to
leave for any reason at all. It is also
frequently been referred to ever since
as constituting nothing less than the
world's largest open-air prison, wherein
the highest ambitions for any of the
millions of people within the prison to
have aspired towards for the past 16
years have been limited only to either
escaping from it or becoming the
prison's new warden. This was the
extremely complicated geopolitical state
that Israel and Palestine both found
themselves in between 2007 and 2017,
with Israel effectively managing its
post-1967 acquired and occupied
territories with a suffocating blockade
enforced around the Gaza Strip,
increasing the numbers of its settlers
in Area C of the West Bank, accompanied
by frequent talks of annexing parts or
all of it directly, prior outright
annexations of East Jerusalem and the
Golan Heights that nobody else in the
outside world recognized as being
legitimate. At the same time, Israel was
maintaining international recognition
based on its 1949 Green Line Armistice
borders with most of the world's other
countries. Though with very notable
exceptions continuing in the Arab and
Muslim worlds who had largely never
recognized Israel's existence ever since
the end of the British Mandate in 1948,
along with several anti-colonial or
anti-Western socialist states in North
Korea, Cuba, and Venezuela. By 2017, the
only Arab states that had ever
recognized Israel's existence and made
peace were Egypt in 1980 and Jordan in
1994, with all the others continuing to
hold ranks in solidarity with the
Palestinians and the three no's of the
1967 Khartoum Resolution. The State of
Palestine, meanwhile, based on its
claims to the entire West Bank, East
Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip from the
Oslo Accords in 1993 and 1995, and
represented by the Fatah-led Palestinian
Authority, was recognized by most of the
outside world as well and was granted
the status of a permanent observer at
the United Nations in 2012. Though very
notably lacked any official recognition
across most of the Western world,
including none from Israel, the United
States, Canada, Australia, Japan, and
most of Western Europe. And despite its
continued de jure claims to sovereignty
in the entire West Bank, East Jerusalem,
and the Gaza Strip, the Palestinian
Authority really only maintained de
facto authority over the Palestinian
archipelago within the West Bank, with
the rest of the West Bank in Area C
under continued Israeli colonial and
military rule. East Jerusalem being
annexed directly into Israel itself, and
the Gaza Strip under the control of its
rival Hamas government, completely
blockaded by the Israelis and Egyptians
with frequent violence erupting all
around it. This was the general
situation that remained more or less the
same between 2007 and 2017, until things
finally started rapidly changing even
further in favor of the Israelis after
Donald Trump assumed the American
presidency in January of 2017. Within
his first year of assuming office in
December of 2017, the Trump
administration extended official US
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital
city of Israel, which effectively
extended formal US recognition to
Israel's unilateral annexation of East
Jerusalem as well. An action that had
previously gone unrecognized by the
entire international community since
1980. The day after the US announcement
was made, the UN Security Council called
for an emergency meeting where 14 out of
the 15 members universally condemned the
American decision, but it was vetoed and
overturned by the sole remaining member
of the council, the United States
itself. The vast majority of the world's
leaders sharply condemned the American
decision because it effectively meant
that the United States would never
recognize East Jerusalem as being a part
of any future independent Palestinian
state. To date, only a handful of other
countries have followed the Americans'
lead in recognizing a unified Jerusalem
as being exclusively Israel's capital.
Guatemala and Honduras, and the only
partially recognized state of Kosovo
being the only other ones. Hamas, still
blockaded within the Gaza Strip,
immediately seized on the opportunity to
demand a new Palestinian Intifada, or
uprising, be launched against the
Israelis in response to the American
decision. On the 14th of May, 2018, the
United States officially transferred its
embassy to Israel from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem with the new embassy's grand
opening, which sparked mass protests
organized by Hamas within the Gaza Strip
near to the Israeli border wall that
went on for every single Friday for
nearly an entire year and a half until
the end of 2019 that tens of thousands
of Palestinians participated in and
which the Israeli Defense Forces
responded to harshly with frequent tear
gas and sniper fire that resulted in the
deaths of at least 223 Palestinians and
more than 9,200 injuries. And in the
same month in America recognized
Jerusalem as Israel's capital, the
Netanyahu administration's ruling Likud
party in Israel passed a resolution that
instructed Israeli legislators to
finally begin pursuing the full
unilateral annexation of the West Bank
next. An action that Israel had long
resisted formally doing ever since 1967,
largely out of the fear of what the
international backlash towards them
would end up being. Then, after becoming
the first outside country to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel in
2017, the United States under the Trump
administration chose to officially
recognize the 1981 era Israeli
annexation of the Golan Heights next in
March of 2019, making the United States
the first and so far only other country
besides Israel itself to recognize the
Golan Heights as fully sovereign Israeli
territory, rather than a Syrian
territory under the occupation of
Israel. These American recognitions of
Israel's sovereignty over East Jerusalem
and the Golan Heights were each
continued forward with the Biden
administration after 2021 as well, and
it has since become a policy that is
widely viewed by countries all around
the world as an act of enormous
hypocrisy on the part of Washington as
America has recognized Israel's
unilateral annexations of territories
that the entire rest of the world
considers to be occupied in which
America itself considered to be occupied
for decades. While America
simultaneously has fiercely rejected
Russia's unilateral annexations of
territories in Ukraine that are also
considered to be occupied like Crimea,
Kherson, Zaporizhzhia, Donetsk, and
Luhansk. It has since made it appear to
many outside observers that America
isn't actually serious about upholding
the norms of international law but is
only interested in selectively applying
it to its rivals like Russia when they
occupy and annex territories while
ignoring it for their friends and allies
like Israel when they occupy and annex
territories. Then it was in the
following year during a White House
press conference on the 28th of January
2020 when the Trump administration
alongside the Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu revealed what they
each referred to as the deal of the
century better known as the Trump peace
plan. The Trump administration's
political proposal to finally resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict once
and for all. The plan envisioned an
independent Palestinian state composed
only of various separated enclaves
within the West Bank that would continue
to be divided and completely surrounded
by significantly expanded Israeli
territory well beyond the mostly
internationally recognized 1949
Armistice Green Line. The plan also
completely rejected a Palestinian
capital based in East Jerusalem proper
which the Trump administration had
effectively recognized as fully Israeli
territory back in 2017. Instead, the
plan proposed that a new Palestinian
capital would be exiled to the outskirts
of Jerusalem and be separated from
Jerusalem proper and all of Jerusalem's
holy sites by the Israeli constructed
West Bank wall that now fully encloses
the city from the rest of the West Bank.
The plan even further demanded that
these limited concessions allotted to a
future independent Palestinian state
would only be accepted by Israel and the
United States if the Palestinian
agreed to a status of total
demilitarization and disarmament and
agreed to completely abandon all
international legal action against
Israel and the United States as well.
And then even further during the press
conference that was announcing the plan
in the White House, Benjamin Netanyahu,
the Israeli Prime Minister, declared
that the Israeli government would be
immediately annexing the entire Jordan
Valley and all of the Israeli
settlements within the West Bank. This
would have effectively resulted in an
Israeli annexation of 30% of the West
Bank's territory and the third formal
unilateral annexation of the Israelis in
the post-1967 territories that virtually
the entire world beyond the United
States and Israel consider to be
occupied territories. The 2020 Trump
peace plan was ultimately resoundingly
rejected by virtually all Palestinians
and even many Israelis alike along with
most of the rest of the world. Joe Biden
and every other leading Democratic 2020
presidential candidate labeled the plan
as a smoke screen for the Israeli
annexation of the occupied West Bank.
The UN rejected the plan and reaffirmed
its own commitment to a two-state
solution within the former mandatory
Palestine based on Israel's pre-1967
Green Line borders and a Palestinian
state in the entire West Bank, East
Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip. Mahmoud
Abbas, the long-time undemocratic leader
of the Fatah party and the Palestinian
Authority since he won his only election
in 2005, showed a map of the Trump peace
plan at the United Nations Security
Council that he famously described as
turning Palestine into Swiss cheese. And
naturally both his own government in the
Palestinian archipelago of the West Bank
and his rival Hamas government in the
Gaza Strip rejected the plan as being
too heavily biased towards the Israeli
side. Moreover, even the Israelis Yesha
Council, an umbrella organization
representing the hundreds of thousands
of Israeli Jewish settlers in the West
Bank, rejected the Trump peace plan as
well on the simple basis that it granted
the Palestinians an independent state at
all which they were completely opposed
to even in this extremely limited
context. But as it became clear that the
2020 Trump plan defining an enlarged
Israeli state and a shrunken Palestinian
state would never be implemented over
the vast disagreements on all sides
involved, the Trump administration began
making significant advances for Israel
on the diplomatic front anyway. Behind
the scenes, the Trump administration had
been mediating negotiations between
Israel and the United Arab Emirates that
suddenly resulted in a shocking joint
statement between them on the 13th of
August 2020. Israel agreed that they
would indefinitely suspend all of their
plans for annexing parts of the West
Bank like the Jordan Valley and their
settlements in area C while in exchange
the United Arab Emirates agreed to fully
normalize their relations with Israel
with the first ever direct commercial
flights launching between them by the
end of the month. It was a shocking
announcement because it represented only
the third time in history since the
British mandate of Palestine expired in
1948 that an Arab state had ever
recognized Israel after Egypt had done
so back in 1980 and after Jordan had
done so in 1994. From 1994 onwards for
the next quarter of a century none of
the rest of the Arabs would officially
break rank and make peace with Israel
sticking on paper to the 1967 three no's
agreement that they had all agreed upon
back in Khartoum all that long time ago.
But now all of a sudden in the summer of
2020 seemingly out of nowhere, the
United Arab Emirates had become the
third Arab state overall and the first
Persian Gulf state to openly violate the
1967 Khartoum Resolution and make peace
with Israel without the final status of
the Palestinians being resolved first.
And it would be far from the last to do
so. In a series of subsequent
negotiations that came to be known
overall as the Abraham Accords, the
Trump administration was able to almost
immediately convince Bahrain after the
United Arab Emirates to become the
fourth Arab state to fully normalize
their relations with Israel in September
of 2020. Then just 3 months after that
in December of 2020 during the closing
days of the Trump administration, the
United States was able to convince
Morocco to become the fifth Arab state
to fully normalize their relations with
Israel as well. That one was
accomplished by Washington offering that
in exchange for Morocco recognizing
Israel the United States would extend
its formal recognition to Morocco's
unilateral annexation of the disputed
territory of Western Sahara, a territory
that Morocco had previously unilaterally
declared to completely annex as their
so-called southern provinces all the way
back in the late 1970s but which
remained unrecognized by anyone else in
the outside world for decades
afterwards. [music] With the United
Nations having always considered the
Moroccan annexation like all other
unilateral annexations that have come
following World War II to be legally
null and void. So in exchange for
Morocco's recognition of Israel then,
the United States became the first
country in the world to ever recognize
Morocco's unilateral annexation of
Western Sahara just as it had become the
first country to ever recognize Israel's
unilateral annexation of the Golan
Heights and East Jerusalem in the couple
years beforehand. All of which would
ultimately provide even more hefty
diplomatic ammunition to countries like
Russia to blast the United States with
later on over Washington's hypocrisy
regarding its selective applications of
international law approving unilateral
annexations of UN-recognized occupied
territories whenever Israel and now also
Morocco do it but fiercely rejecting it
whenever Russia does the same thing in
Ukraine. Three years later in 2023,
Israel would return the favor granted by
Morocco by becoming the second state in
the outside world to formally recognize
Morocco's annexation of Western Sahara
as well. And then on January 6th, 2021
on the very same day that a mob of
pro-Trump supporters stormed the
American Capitol Building in Washington,
D.C., another event of monumental
geopolitical importance was
simultaneously taking place over on the
other side of the world within the
symbolic capital city of Sudan,
Khartoum, the very location from which
the Arab League had previously
proclaimed its three no's policy towards
Israel more than 53 years previously.
That day on January 6th in that precise
symbolic location, the Sudanese
government became the next Arab
government to formally sign on to the
Abraham Accords as well which initiated
the process of full Sudanese
normalization with Israel as well. In
order to convince them, the Trump
administration had agreed to remove
Sudan from America's state sponsor of
terrorism list and provided them with a
$1.2 billion loan to help clear Sudan's
government debt to the World Bank. And
just like that, the Trump administration
was able to increase the pace of
Israel's recognition in the Arab world
from only two across 72 years of history
to four more in fewer than 5 months
bringing the total up to six of them by
2021. And all without the underlying
issue of Palestinian statehood being
resolved first that had long prevented
Israel's recognition by any of the
Arabs. By the time the Biden
administration assumed office in
Washington, it was seeming as if Israel
was indeed going to be able to both eat
their cake and still have it, too. The
Palestinians themselves were fully
contained, divided, and scattered with
an uncompromising Hamas-led government
still dedicated to Israel's total
destruction blockaded in Gaza, a mostly
cooperative and collaborating Fatah-led
government isolated and divided across
areas A and B of the West Bank, several
million more completely removed
Palestinian refugees scattered across
Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon, and about
1.6 million Palestinian citizens of
Israel itself who comprised a minority
of only about 20% of Israel's citizen
population despite Palestinians' total
population across all of the former
mandatory Palestine area today remaining
a slight majority at about 51% of the
overall population compared to the Jews
at about 47% to say nothing of the
several million additional Palestinian
refugees beyond the former mandatory
Palestine in Jordan, Syria, Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, and Lebanon who have
consistently argued for a right of
return to the area of the former British
mandate that they or their ancestors
fled or were forced out from, a right
that represents a major component of
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations that
has always been refused by the Israeli
side. From the Palestinian perspective,
if more and more outside Arab states
continue normalizing their ties with
Israel, despite the Palestinians dire
situation on statehood, it could
eventually have reached a tipping point
where the Israeli government would
eventually feel secure enough in a
region with fewer overtly hostile
enemies to finally begin the process of
formally annexing territories in the
West Bank, like the Jordan Valley and
their numerous settlements, if not the
entire West Bank altogether. Something
that has long been a goal of numerous
right-wing and far-right Israeli parties
for decades, but which has so far always
been resisted out of fears of what the
international response towards them
would end up being. But if the fear of a
harsh international response was
removed, then what other deterrent would
there have ever been? For the incoming
Biden administration in 2021, the next
goal for continuing on the Abraham
Accords even further and achieving the
biggest prize of all would be convincing
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to become
the next Arab country to normalize its
relations with Israel as well. By this
point in time, to most of the monarchist
Gulf Arab states, Israel was already
naturally starting to be viewed as less
of an outright hostile enemy and more of
a potential ally that they could maybe
cooperate and do business with. The
theocratic Islamic Republic in Iran,
ruled by the Ayatollahs, and their
ideology of radical Shiite Islamic
revolution, had long espoused a foreign
policy that advocated for the eventual
unification of the entire Muslim world
beneath the authority of their own Shia
dominated clergy, which included three
initial objectives to accomplish first
in very specific orders of importance.
Number one, destroy and remove all
American and Western influence in the
Islamic world that was perceived as a
lasting vestige of the age of
colonialism and corruptive. Number two,
completely destroy the state of Israel
that is similarly viewed by Iran's
regime as a foreign Western colonial
power occupying lands that are
historically and rightfully Islamic. And
number three, spread the Islamic
revolution and the authority of Iran's
Shiite clergy to the rest of the Muslim
world, which necessitates overthrowing
and toppling all of the various
monarchies that exist across the Muslim
world that Iran's clergy deemed to be
heretical and contradictory to where
authority within Islamic states should
truly lie, with the clergy and not with
the nobility. Thus, ever since the
Islamic revolution of 1979, Iran has
been consistently opposed to Israel's
entire existence and to the existence of
the Sunni Muslim monarchist regimes
reigning in Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates, Bahrain, and Jordan. Just
before 2020, when the Abraham Accords
began rapidly accelerating Israel's
recognition across the Arab world, the
Iranians were making significant
geopolitical gains against the Arab
monarchy specifically. They'd
successfully backed the Shia adjacent
Houthi movement in Yemen and kept them
in power over most of the western side
of the country, immediately opposite
from Saudi Arabia's Shia majority and
unstable southern border, and directly
across from the strategic Bab el-Mandeb
Strait, through which a large amount of
Saudi Arabia's oil exports flow through.
Despite the Saudis spending nearly 265
billion dollars in a years-long military
intervention to crush the Houthis that
failed, Iran's Shia militia
organizations were growing increasingly
powerful and influential in Iraq after
the destruction of ISIS. Bashar
al-Assad's government was winning the
civil war in Syria against the Saudi
supported side. Hezbollah was growing
even more powerful and more heavily
armed than the Lebanese government
itself. While the Gaza Strip, ruled by
Hamas, remained a thorn in the side of
both Israel and the anti-Islamist regime
in Egypt of Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. These
pieces, carefully positioned by the
Iranians over decades across the board
of the Middle East, represents what
Tehran likes to call its axis of
resistance. And Saudi Arabia was
beginning to feel like the axis was
encircling them. And then in 2019, Iran
itself, or its proxies, even fired
cruise missiles at Saudi Arabia that
blew up the Kingdom's biggest oil
processing facilities at Abqaiq and
Khurais, that temporarily knocked half
of the country's oil production offline.
An attack that the Kingdom's historic
defender, the United States, refused to
retaliate over. The Saudi monarchy
quickly calculated after those attacks
and after their military quagmire in
Yemen that in order for them to have the
best shot at surviving the coming
inevitable confrontations with Iran over
the rest of the century, they could no
longer continue relying exclusively on
their status as the world's biggest
exporter and supplier of oil to keep the
United States interested in defending
them. A country that was becoming
increasingly self-reliant on their own
oil production through the shale and
fracking revolutions. They needed to
lock down an ironclad mutual defense
treaty with the United States, just like
the ones Washington has with their
closest allies like NATO, Japan, South
Korea, Australia, and the Philippines
that would legally bind the United
States to come to the Kingdom's defense
if they were ever to be attacked by Iran
or their proxies again. And to help lock
that treaty down, they began to also
recognize that the enemy of their enemy
could also end up becoming their friend.
And that friend was potentially Israel,
a country they had long opposed on the
basis of solidarity with the Palestinian
Arabs, but a country that posed no
serious existential threat to the
monarchy in the Saudi Kingdom, the same
way that revolutionary Iran and its axis
of resistance did. That's part of the
context that contributed to the Sunni
monarchies in the United Arab Emirates
and Bahrain agreeing to both recognize
Israel with the Trump administration's
mediation in 2020. And it's been a heavy
part of the calculus that has been going
on with the Biden administration's
attempts to mediate a further
normalization agreement between the
Saudis and the Israelis next. And thus,
across 2022 and 2023, the Saudis, the
Israelis, and the Americans were all
negotiating and discussing this process
to jointly solve all of their own unique
problems of the 2020s. Going into the
negotiations, the Saudis were
deliberately artificially cutting their
own oil production lower and lower to
the point where their spare oil
production capacity reached 3 million
barrels of oil per day by October of
2023, meaning that essentially, within a
single month's notice, the Saudis could
hypothetically decide to just flip a
switch and unleash the spigots and dump
an entire Brazil's worth of oil
production onto the world market again,
which would, of course, dramatically
reduce global oil prices, greatly taper
global inflationary pressures and fuel
prices leading into the upcoming
American presidential election, while
simultaneously harming Russia's ability
to continue financing its war in
Ukraine. As Russia, being the second
largest oil exporter in the world,
overwhelmingly relies on selling its own
oil and gas reserves to fund their own
government and military expenditures.
And the lower global oil prices are, the
less money Russia has to continue
funding its war in Ukraine. The Biden
administration, obviously, would greatly
desire this outcome of the Saudis
unleashing their taps. And to sweeten
the deal even further, the Saudis would
be willing to fully normalize their
relations with Israel as well, granting
the Biden administration a historic
political achievement that the Trump
administration before it wasn't quite
capable of acquiring. All they were
asking for in return was for Washington
to solve all of their own problems. An
ironclad mutual defense treaty
permanently committing the United States
to the Kingdom's future defense against
Iran, and American nuclear energy
technology to enable the Saudis to
establish a nuclear energy industry that
would include the ability to enrich
their own uranium that, in a pinch,
could enable the Saudis to rapidly
develop their own nuclear weapon in the
event that the Iranians suddenly
developed one first. To the Biden
administration in the United States, a
deal enabling greater cooperation
between the Israelis and the Gulf Arab
monarchies was also highly desirable for
multiple reasons. It was well known by
this point that America was attempting
to finally withdraw most of its military
forces from the Middle East in order to
focus on countering what Washington
views as the far more pressing
geopolitical challenges of the decade,
Russian military aggression and
expansion in Europe aimed at Ukraine,
Georgia, Moldova, and likely elsewhere
in the former Soviet world, and Chinese
desires to fully and finally dominate
Taiwan in East Asia. The Biden
administration's commitment to finally
withdraw from America's military
presence in the region to focus more
aggressively on these other theaters was
most infamously symbolized by the
disastrous American withdrawal from
Afghanistan in the summer of 2021 and
the ensuing Taliban blitzkrieg that
immediately catapulted the Taliban right
back into power again, that undo nearly
all of America's trillions of dollars,
thousands of lives, and decades of
effort spent trying to dislodge them.
Washington knows that Iran and its axis
of resistance remains its most potent
geopolitical threat in the Middle East,
who is the most capable force of
throwing the entire world economy into
chaos by launching wars in the Persian
Gulf and all around the world's most
critical oil and gas trade routes. The
consequences of which would be spiking
global oil and gas prices that would
most immediately benefit the Russian war
machine that is still raging across
Ukraine. This is why the United States,
now more than ever, needs its local
allies in the Middle East who have
historically not cooperated well
together because of the Palestinian
issue remaining unresolved to set aside
their differences and finally begin
cooperating to contain Iran and its axis
of resistance, while Washington's own
forces relocate to focus on containing
China in the Pacific and Russia in
Eastern Europe. This is why the United
States wants Israel and Saudi Arabia,
its two biggest partners in the Middle
East and the two greatest Middle Eastern
military powers beyond Iran and Turkey,
who have never had any formal relations
before, to finally begin working
together along with the United Arab
Emirates and Bahrain against all of
their mutual enemies in the region,
Iran's axis of resistance. And then to
Israel, Saudi Arabia, of all countries,
extending their recognition to the
Jewish state would be a permanent
game-changer. Saudi Arabia is the
leading oil exporter of the world, and
with that comes enormous economic power.
Dominated by its world-leading oil
exports, Saudi Arabia wields what is by
far the largest economy in the Arab
world that is more than two and a half
times larger than the Egyptian economy,
despite having only a third of Egypt's
population. The Saudi economy is indeed
so outsized compared to the rest of the
Arab world that it represents nearly 1/3
of the entire Arab
all on its own. Saudi Arabia is thus
most often thought of as the premier
leading Arab state today, despite having
only the sixth largest overall
population in the Arab world. And it's
not just because of Saudi Arabia's
outsized economic power, either, but for
the religious legitimacy within the
worldwide Islamic faith, owing to their
control and stewardship over the two
holiest cities and sites in Islam, Mecca
and Medina. If the Saudis recognized
Israel's legitimacy, then there's no
telling how much further their
heavyweight would have carried with
influencing even more Arab and Muslim
countries around the world to recognize
Israel next, especially in the context
of Sudan, Morocco, Bahrain, and the
United Arab Emirates, all recognizing
Israel immediately beforehand, too. But
the Saudi monarchy knew that simply
recognizing Israel without addressing
the underlying question of Palestinian
statehood at all would have been a
deeply unpopular move among their own
people, who continue to overwhelmingly
value their solidarity with their fellow
Palestinian Arabs more than the cold
geopolitical calculus that the ruling
family prioritizes for the sake of their
own survival. And so, Riyadh was also
demanding some limited and relatively
small concessions from the Israelis
relating to the ongoing Israeli
occupation of the West Bank in order to
save some face and appear to continue
being the Arab world's champion. But
this was proving difficult for
specifically the new Israeli government
of 2023 to accept because it was a brand
new coalition government largely
composed of hardcore right-wing Israeli
nationalist parties who wanted to
completely annex the entire West Bank
outright. The preceding November 2022
legislative elections in Israel had
resulted in what has been called the
most far-right government in Israel's
entire history, a byproduct of years
worth of higher fertility rates among
Israel's most religious sects of
Judaism, resulting in a shifting of
demographics further towards the
religious right that is expected to
continue for decades to come. Leading
into the negotiations on normalization
with Saudi Arabia, Benjamin Netanyahu
was already considered to have been
fighting within Israel for his continued
political survival. His new coalition
government in 2023 consists of
pro-settler parties like Jewish Power
and the Religious Zionist Party that
favor deporting Palestinians considered
to be disloyal from Israel and favor
further Israeli annexations in the West
Bank. The coalition agreement between
Netanyahu's own Likud Party and the
Religious Zionist Party that followed
those elections in November of 2022
specifically stated, quote, "The prime
minister will work towards the
formulation and promotion of a policy
whereby sovereignty is applied to the
Judea and Samaria." Judea and Samaria
being the Israeli right-wing term for
the West Bank. As a result, in February
of 2023, the Israeli Defense Ministry
agreed to transfer most of their
administrative powers in the West Bank
over to a West Bank settler named
Bezalel Smotrich, the leader of the
Religious Zionist Party and the brand
new coalition appointed Minister of
Finance, a move that effectively
appointed Smotrich, an avowed Jewish
supremacist who openly opposes any
Palestinian statehood at all and denies
the existence of the Palestinian people
as the de facto governor of the West
Bank. And while the move might not have
been accompanied by the same kind of
pomp and circumstance that went along
with Russia's declared unilateral
annexations of occupied territories in
Ukraine, this Israeli transfer of
authority in the West Bank from military
rule to civilian rule effectively
amounted to a quiet de jure Israeli
annexation of the West Bank anyway and
further cemented Israel's long-term
designs on incorporating the territory
even further at the expense of the
Palestinians and in contravention to the
agreed-upon Oslo Accords of 1993 and
1995. And thus, for Netanyahu to
compromise on any plans of further
incorporating the West Bank into Israel
would mean betraying his own coalition
partners who were keeping him in power,
which significantly tied his hands on
the negotiations with Saudi Arabia, who
was wanting to see at least some
symbolic progress against the occupation
of the West Bank being made. But
progress was still being made
nonetheless, with the Saudi Crown Prince
himself saying in September of 2023,
mere weeks before Hamas's attack on
Israel, that every day the prospects of
normalized relations between the kingdom
and Israel were getting closer. All of
this build-up to war began coming to a
head in 2023 when Iran and the Saudis
first negotiated a full restoration in
their own diplomatic relations in March
with the mediation of the Chinese, a
clear attempt by Iran to present itself
and its axis as being less threatening
to Riyadh in order to dissuade the
Saudis from seeing the need to ally any
further with Israel. Clearly, Iran does
not want its two biggest self-declared
enemies in the region, Israel and the
Saudi monarchy, actually cooperating
together against them. Iran would prefer
to divide and conquer and prevent Israel
and the Saudis from being able to
cooperate against them. Divided, they
are easier targets for Tehran and their
axis to work against independently, one
at a time, whenever they believe the
times are right. Any deal between Tel
Aviv and Riyadh that would disrupt that
capability would have thus been anathema
and unacceptable to Tehran's regime.
Ultimately, as of the production of this
video, it's still not precisely clear if
Iran ended up having any direct
influence or not on Hamas's attack on
Israel that was launched on October 7th.
But Hamas and Iran do have a very long
relationship. Iran somewhat supports
Hamas's regime in the Gaza Strip because
they share at least one core aligned
goal, the total destruction of Israel as
a state. But Hamas is not just a total
proxy of Iran that answers directly to
the Ayatollah in the same kind of way
that Hezbollah in Lebanon does. Hamas
and Iran have core ideological and
theological differences that matter.
Hamas is a militant Sunni Islamist and
Palestinian Arab nationalist
organization, while Iran envisions the
ultimate establishment of a pan-Islamist
state ruled by their own Shiite clergy
that would, assumingly, one day include
all of Palestine as well. Of course,
differences in ideology haven't stopped
Iran from cooperating with other regimes
in its axis of resistance before, such
as the Arab nationalist and nominally
secular Assad regime in Syria. But the
differences between Hamas and Iran are
still notable nonetheless. Hamas has
historically cooperated with Iran and
the rest of the axis of resistance in a
sort of marriage of convenience, not
because they do so enthusiastically, but
because there's basically nobody else in
the world who will actually directly
support them against Israel. As Hamas is
recognized as a terrorist organization
by basically the entire Western world
and Egypt. Hamas knows that Iran views
them as essentially a pawn on their
board of the Middle East, a pawn that
can be sacrificed to achieve strategic
outcomes, like finally crashing the
Israel-Saudi normalization process once
and for all. But Hamas has been left
with no other choice but to operate as
Iran's pawn. And even independently of
Iran's reasons and influence, Hamas had
their own motives to launch their attack
on October 7th, as well. By provoking
Israel into launching a massive
retaliatory invasion of the Gaza Strip,
it put Saudi Arabia into a very
uncomfortable position. Would they, as
the self-professed leader of the Arab
world and advocate for the Arab people,
continue normalizing relations with
Israel in the midst of cataclysmic
suffering of the Palestinian Arabs in
Gaza? Continuing to do so would have
fundamentally undermined the Saudi
monarchy's own legitimacy with its
people and with Arabs and Muslims the
world over. And so, potentially, with
them deciding to stop the deal, the
Saudis and Israelis wouldn't end up
being able to cooperate together against
one of Hamas's biggest supporters, Iran.
The pace of continued recognition of
Israel Arab world from the Abraham
Accords may finally be stopped. The
unresolved question of Palestinian
statehood may finally return back to the
forefront of political discourse in the
Arab and outside worlds. International
pressure on Israel may continue to grow.
And perhaps the Israeli government would
feel less secure in their looming plans
to annex the West Bank and potentially
even feel less secure in continuing on
with their 16-year-long blockade of the
Gaza Strip. So far, it appears that many
of these objectives have begun to
already be achieved. Mohammed bin
Salman, the Crown Prince of Saudi
Arabia, has already announced that the
talks of normalizing relations with
Israel will be put indefinitely on hold
until the war in Gaza is over. And he
has begun increasing his demands of
Israel for a deal much further than he
was before. Now, the Saudis are
demanding that in order for the
normalization agreement to be made after
the war is concluded, Israel must fully
withdraw all of its hundreds of
thousands of settlers from the West Bank
entirely, something that the hundreds of
thousands of Israeli settlers themselves
and the increasingly far-right Israeli
demographics and parties who currently
govern the country will most likely
never be willing to accept. And that
means that it's highly doubtful that
Israel and the Saudis will be able to
actually work out a deal and fully
cooperate together against Iran going
forward. [music] Moreover, Washington's
strategic plans for a new security
arrangement in the Middle East to cover
for the reshuffling of forces to focus
on countering China and Russia now
appear to have failed. With the future
cooperation between the Israelis and the
Saudis against the Iranians in the axis
of resistance now appearing to be in
tatters, Iran will continue to be
emboldened to whittle away at the
Israelis and Saudis one at a time and at
a time and place of their own choosing.
While Iran's increasingly close ally
Russia will be strengthened by the deal
falling apart as well. Because now the
Saudis have very little incentive to
turn back online their spare oil
production capacity of 3 million barrels
of oil a day, which will likely keep oil
prices higher for longer, and which will
keep allowing the Russians to continue
earning more money on their oil exports
to keep pushing back against American
influence in Ukraine and Europe.
Moreover, America now might not be able
to afford to turn its full attention
away from the Middle East, like they had
previously hoped to do. Meaning that
America's own forces will have to pick
and choose their battles of support
between a rotating cast of Israel,
Ukraine, and Taiwan, as the increasingly
close partnership of Iran, Russia, and
China choose when to strike against
global American hegemony next. As the
Israeli ground forces are now invading
the Gaza Strip, and are dedicated to
Hamas's complete destruction, it becomes
apparent that sometimes you have to be
willing to sacrifice a pawn in order to
bait your enemy into making a strategic
mistake. And it seems like Tehran has
played their piece, knowingly or not,
extraordinarily well. Of course, there's
a lot more history and context to the
many, many wars fought between Israel
and Hamas that eventually led up to the
current war that's ongoing today. The
current conflict is actually the fifth
war that they have fought between each
other, with previous large-scale wars
being waged between them in 2021 and
2014, and 2009, and in 2008. And
skirmishes and attacks between them
being fought all in between that have
all contributed even further to the
build-up of total war that began in
October of 2023.